Introduction
This practice guide describes a process-based approach to project management. The framework
for this approach is based on the five Project Management Process Groups:
▶ Initiating. Those processes performed to define a new project or a new phase of
an existing project by obtaining authorization to start the project or phase.
▶ Planning. Those processes required to establish the scope of the project, refine
the objectives, and define the course of action required to attain the objectives
that the project was undertaken to achieve.
▶ Executing. Those processes performed to complete the work defined in the project
management plan to satisfy the project requirements.
▶ Monitoring and Controlling. Those processes required to track, review, and regulate
the progress and performance of the project; identify any areas in which changes
to the plan are required; and initiate the corresponding changes.
▶ Closing. Those processes performed to formally complete or close the project, phase,
or contract.
The Process Groups are independent of the development approach (i.e., predictive, adaptive,
or hybrid), application area (e.g., marketing, information services, accounting, etc.), and industry
(e.g., construction, aerospace, telecommunications, pharmaceuticals, etc.). Process Groups: A Practice
Guide provides an overview of project and development life cycles in this introduction, with a focus
on predictive life cycles throughout, and describes the 49 processes within these five Process Groups
along with the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs associated with those processes.
This practice guide identifies the processes that are considered good practices on most
projects, most of the time. Project management should be tailored to fit the needs of the project.
There is no requirement that any particular process or practice be performed. The processes should be
tailored for the specific project and/or organization. Specific methodology recommendations are
outside the scope of this practice guide.
1.1 PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project
activities to meet project requirements. Project management is accomplished through the appropriate
application and integration of the project management processes identified for the project.
Managing a project typically includes but is not limited to the following activities:
▶ Identify project requirements.
▶ Address the various needs, concerns, and expectations of stakeholders.
▶ Establish and maintain active communication with stakeholders.
▶ Execute the work required to deliver the project outcomes.
▶ Manage resources.
▶ Balance the competing project constraints, which include but are not limited to scope,
schedule, cost, quality, resources, and risk.
Project circumstances will influence how each project management process is implemented
and how the project constraints are prioritized.
1.1.1 IMPORTANCE OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Project management enables organizations to execute projects effectively and efficiently. Effective
project management helps individuals, groups, and public and private organizations to:
▶ Meet business objectives.
▶ Satisfy stakeholder expectations.
▶ Be more predictable.
▶ Increase chances of success.
▶ Deliver the right products at the right time.
▶ Resolve problems and issues.
▶ Respond to risks in a timely manner.
▶ Optimize the use of organizational resources.
▶ Identify, recover, or terminate failing projects.
▶ Manage constraints (e.g., scope, quality, schedule, costs, resources).
▶ Balance the influence of constraints on the project (e.g., increased scope may increase
cost or schedule).
▶ Respond to rapidly evolving markets.
▶ Manage change using a controlled process.
Poorly managed projects or the absence of project management may result in:
▶ Missed requirements,
▶ Missed deadlines,
▶ Cost overruns,
▶ Poor quality,
▶ Rework,
▶ Waste,
▶ Uncontrolled expansion of the project,
▶ Loss of reputation for the organization,
▶ Unsatisfied stakeholders, and/or
▶ Failure in achieving the objectives for which the project was undertaken.
1.1.2 FOUNDATIONAL ELEMENTS
The foundational elements that are essential for working in and understanding the discipline
of project management are:
▶ Project. A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result.
(See Section 1.2 for additional information.)
▶ Program. Related projects, subsidiary programs, and program activities that are managed
in a coordinated manner to obtain benefits not available from managing them individually.
(See Section 1.3 for additional information.)
▶ Program management. The application of knowledge, skills, and principles to a program
to achieve the program objectives and obtain benefits and control not available by
managing program components individually. (See Section 1.3 for additional information.)
▶ Portfolio. Projects, programs, subsidiary portfolios, and operations managed as a group to
achieve strategic objectives. (See Section 1.4 for additional information.)
▶ Portfolio management. The centralized management of one or more portfolios to achieve
strategic objectives. (See Section 1.4 for additional information.)
▶ Relationship of project, program, portfolio, and operations management. Projects
may be managed in three separate scenarios: as a stand-alone project that is outside of a
program or portfolio, within a program, or within a portfolio. (See Section 1.5 for additional
information.)
▶ Operations management. The ongoing production of goods and/or services. It ensures
that business operations continue efficiently by using the optimal resources needed to
meet customer demands. It is concerned with managing processes that transform inputs
(e.g., materials, components, energy, and labor) into outputs (e.g., products, goods,
and/or services).
Operations management is an area that is outside the scope of formal project management
as described in this practice guide.
▶ Operations and project management. Ongoing operations are outside of the scope of a
project; however, there are intersecting points where the two areas cross. (See Section 1.6
for additional information.)
▶ Organizational project management (OPM). A framework in which portfolio, program,
and project management are integrated with organizational enablers in order to achieve
strategic objectives. (See Section 1.6 for additional information.)
1.2 PROJECTS
A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result.
Projects are undertaken to fulfill objectives by producing deliverables that result in the desired
outcomes. An objective is defined as an outcome toward which work is to be directed, a strategic
position to be attained, a purpose to be achieved, a result to be obtained, a product to be produced,
or a service to be performed. A deliverable is defined as any unique and verifiable product, result,
or capability to perform a service that is required to be produced to complete a process, phase, or
project. Deliverables may be tangible or intangible.
The temporary nature of projects indicates that a project has a definite beginning and end.
Temporary does not necessarily mean a project has a short duration. The end of the project is
reached when one or more of the following is true:
▶ The project’s objectives have been achieved.
▶ The objectives will not or cannot be met.
▶ Funding is exhausted or no longer available for allocation to the project.
▶ The need for the project no longer exists (e.g., the customer no longer wants the project
completed, a change in strategy or priority ends the project, the organizational management
provides direction to end the project).
▶ The human or physical resources are no longer available.
▶ The project is terminated for legal cause or convenience.
1.2.1 PROJECTS DRIVE CHANGE
Projects drive change in organizations. From a business perspective, a project is aimed at moving
an organization from one state to another state in order to achieve a specific objective (see Figure 1-1).
Before the project begins, the organization is commonly referred to as being in the current state. The
desired result of the change driven by the project is described as the future state.
The successful completion of a project results in the organization moving to the future state
and achieving the specific objective.
Organization
Social and Environmental Impacts
Business
Value It is becoming more common for initial planning to consider social and environmental impacts in
addition to the financial impacts (sometimes referred to as the triple bottom line). This may take
the form of a product life cycle assessment which evaluates the potential environmental impacts
of a product, process, or system. The product life cycle considers the impacts of materials and
Future State
processes with regard to sustainability, toxicity, and the environment.
Project
Current State Project Activities
• Activity A
• Activity B
• Activity C
• Etc.
Time
Figure 1-1. Organizational State Transition via a Project
1.2.2 PROJECTS ENABLE BUSINESS VALUE CREATION
PMI defines business value as the net quantifiable benefit derived from a business endeavor.
The benefit may be tangible, intangible, or both. In business analysis, business value is considered
the return, in the form of elements such as time, money, goods, or intangibles in return for
something. Business value in projects refers to the benefit that the results of a specific project
provide to its stakeholders. The benefit from projects may be tangible, intangible, or both.
Social and Environmental Impacts
It is becoming more common for initial planning to consider social and environmental impacts in
addition to the financial impacts (sometimes referred to as the triple bottom line). This may take
the form of a product life cycle assessment which evaluates the potential environmental impacts
of a product, process, or system. The product life cycle considers the impacts of materials and
processes with regard to sustainability, toxicity, and the environment.
1.2.3 CONTEXTS FOR PROJECT INITIATION
Organizational leaders initiate projects in response to factors acting upon their organizations.
Projects provide the means for organizations to successfully make the changes necessary to deal
with these factors. There are four fundamental categories for these factors, which illustrate the
context of a project:
▶ Meet regulatory, legal, or social requirements;
▶ Satisfy stakeholder requests or needs;
▶ Create, improve, or fix products, processes, or services; and
▶ Implement or change business or technological strategies.
These categories should map directly to the strategic objectives of the organization and projects
will fulfill the objectives and, ultimately, deliver business value. Examples of factors that lead to the
creation of a project are shown in Table 1-1.
Table 1-1. Factors that Lead to the Creation of a Project
Examples of Specific Factors
X X
X
X X
X
X X X
X
X X
X
X
X
X X
X
X X
ro
,lageL
,yrotalugeR
teeM
stnemeriuqeR
laicoS
redlohekatS
yfsitaS
sdeeN
ro
stseuqeR
,stcudorP
xiF
ro
,evorpmI
,etaerC
secivreS
ro
,sessecorP
ssenisuB
egnahC
ro
tnemelpmI
seigetartS
lacigolonhceT
ro
Specific Factor
New technology An electronics firm authorizes a new project to develop a faster, cheaper, and
smaller laptop based on advances in computer memory and electronics
technology
Competitive forces Lower pricing on products by a competitor results in the need to lower
production costs to remain competitive
Material issues A municipal bridge developed cracks in some support members resulting in a
project to fix the problems
Political changes A newly elected official instigating project funding changes to a current project
Market demand A car company authorizes a project to build more fuel-efficient cars in response
to gasoline shortages
Economic changes An economic downturn results in a change in the priorities for a current project
Customer request An electric utility authorizes a project to build a substation to serve a new
industrial park
Stakeholder demands A stakeholder requires that a new output be produced by the organization
Legal requirement A chemical manufacturer authorizes a project to establish guidelines for the
proper handling of a new toxic material
Business process An organization implements a project resulting from a Lean Six Sigma value
improvements stream mapping exercise
Strategic opportunity A training company authorizes a project to create a new course to increase its
or business need revenues
Social need A nongovernmental organization in a developing country authorizes a project to
provide potable water systems, latrines, and sanitation education to
communities suffering from high rates of infectious diseases
Environmental A public company authorizes a project to create a new service for electric car
considerations sharing to reduce pollution
1.3 PROGRAMS AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
A program is defined as related projects, subsidiary programs, and program activities
managed in a coordinated manner to obtain benefits not available from managing them individually.
Programs include program-related work outside the scope of the discrete projects in the program.
Program management is the application of knowledge, skills, and principles to a program to achieve
the program objectives and obtain benefits and control not available by managing related program
components individually. Programs may also include work that is operational in nature.
Program management supports organizational strategies by authorizing, changing, or
terminating projects and managing their interdependencies.
1.4 PORTFOLIOS AND PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
A portfolio is defined as projects, programs, subsidiary portfolios, and operations managed
in a coordinated manner to achieve strategic objectives. Portfolio management is the centralized
management of one or more portfolios to achieve strategic objectives. Portfolio management
focuses on ensuring the portfolio is performing consistent with the organization’s objectives and
evaluating portfolio components to optimize resource allocation. Portfolios may include work that
is operational in nature.
1.5 RELATIONSHIP AMONG PORTFOLIOS, PROGRAMS,
AND PROJECTS
A project may be managed in three separate scenarios: as a stand-alone project (outside a
portfolio or program); within a program; or within a portfolio. Project management has interactions
with portfolio and program management when a project is within a portfolio or program. Figure 1-2
shows the relationships between portfolios and programs, between portfolios and projects, and
between programs and individual projects. These relationships are not always hierarchical.
Organizational Strategy
Sample Portfolio
Program Program Portfolio
A B A
Program Program
B1 C
Project Project Project Project Project Project Project Project Project Operations
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Shared Resources and Stakeholders
Figure 1-2. Example of Portfolio, Program, and Project Management Interfaces
Table 1-2 gives a comparative overview of portfolios, programs, and projects.
Table 1-2. Comparative Overview of Portfolios, Programs, and Projects
Organizational Project Management
Projects Programs Portfolios
Definition A project is a temporar y endeavor A program is a group of related A portfolio is a collection of projects,
undertaken to create a unique projects, subsidiary programs, and programs, subsidiary portfolios, and
product, service, or result. program activities that are managed in operations managed as a group to
a coordinated manner to obtain achieve strategic objectives.
benefits not available from managing
them individually.
Scope Projects have defined objectives. Programs have a scope that Portfolios have an organizational
Scope is progressively elaborated encompasses the scopes of its scope that changes with the strategic
throughout the project life cycle. program components. Programs objectives of the organization.
produce benefits to an organization by
ensuring that the outputs and
outcomes of program components are
delivered in a coordinated and
complementary manner.
Change Project managers expect change and Programs are managed in a manner Portfolio managers continuously
implement processes to keep change that accepts and adapts to change as monitor changes in the broader
managed and controlled. necessary to optimize the delivery of internal and external environments.
benefits as the program’s components
deliver outcomes and/or outputs.
Planning Project managers progressively Programs are managed using Portfolio managers create and
elaborate high-level information into high-level plans that track the maintain necessary processes and
detailed plans throughout the project interdependencies and progress of communication relative to the
life cycle. program components. Program plans aggregate portfolio.
are also used to guide planning at the
component level.
Management Project managers manage the project Programs are managed by program Portfolio managers may manage or
team to meet the project objectives. managers who ensure that program coordinate portfolio management
benefits are delivered as expected, by staff, or program and project staff that
coordinating the activities of a may have reporting responsibilities
program’s components. into the aggregate portfolio.
Monitoring Project managers monitor and control Program managers monitor the Portfolio managers monitor strategic
the work of producing the products, progress of program components to changes and aggregate resource
services, or results that the project ensure the overall goals, schedules, allocation, performance results, and
was undertaken to produce. budget, and benefits of the program risk of the portfolio.
will be met.
Success Success is measured by product and A program’s success is measured by Success is measured in terms of the
project quality, timeliness, budget the program’s ability to deliver its aggregate investment performance
compliance, and degree of customer intended benefits to an organization, and benefit realization of the portfolio.
satisfaction. and by the program’s efficiency and
effectiveness in delivering those
benefits.
1.6 ORGANIZATIONAL PROJECT MANAGEMENT (OPM)
Organizational project management (OPM) is a strategy execution framework utilizing portfolio,
program, and project management. It provides a framework that enables organizations to consistently
and predictably deliver on organizational strategy, producing better performance; better results; and
a sustainable, competitive advantage.
Figure 1-3 shows the organizational environment where strategy, a portfolio, programs and
projects, and operations interact.
Organizational Environment
Portfolio Review and Adjustments
Programs
Portfolio: Operations:
and Projects:
Strategy Value Business Value
Results
Decisions Realization
Delivery
Business Impact Analysis
Value Performance Analysis
Figure 1-3. Organizational Project Management
For more information on OPM, refer to The Standard for Organizational Project Management [2].
1.7 PROJECT COMPONENTS AND CONSIDERATIONS
Projects comprise several key components that, when effectively managed, result in their
successful completion. This section of the practice guide identifies and explains these components.
The various components interrelate to one another during the management of a project.
The key components are described briefly in Table 1-3. These components are more fully
explained in Sections 1.7.1 through 1.7.5.
Table 1-3. Description of Key Components
PMBOK® Guide Key Component Brief Description
Project life cycle (Section 1.7.1) The series of phases that a project passes through from its start to its completion.
Project phase (Section 1.7.2) A collection of logically related project activities that culminates in the completion of
one or more deliverables.
Phase gate (Section 1.7.3) A review at the end of a phase in which a decision is made to continue to the next
phase, to continue with modification, or to end a program or project.
Project management processes A systematic series of activities directed toward causing an end result where one or
(Section 1.7.4) more inputs will be acted upon to create one or more outputs.
Project Management Process Group A logical grouping of project management inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs.
(Section 1.7.5) The Project Management Process Groups include Initiating, Planning, Executing,
Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing. Project Management Process Groups are not
project phases.
1.7.1 PROJECT AND DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLES
A project life cycle is the series of phases that a project passes through from its start to
its completion. It provides the basic framework for managing the project. This basic framework
applies regardless of the specific project work involved. The phases may be sequential, iterative,
or overlapping. All projects can be mapped to the generic life cycle shown in Figure 1-4.
Project Life Cycle
Starting Organizing Carrying Out Ending the
the Project and Preparing the Work Project
Process Groups
Monitoring
Initiating Planning Executing and Closing
Processes Processes Processes Controlling Processes
Processes
KEY: Phase Project Potential Time Line
Gate Phase Use
Figure 1-4. Interrelationship of Key Components in Projects
Project life cycles can be predictive or adaptive. Within a project life cycle, there are generally
one or more phases that are associated with the development of the product, service, or result.
These are called development life cycles, which can be predictive, adaptive, iterative, incremental,
or a hybrid model:
▶ In a predictive life cycle, the project scope, time,
and cost are determined in the early phases of the It is up to the project
life cycle. Any changes to the scope are carefully management team to
managed. Predictive life cycles may also be referred determine the best
to as waterfall life cycles. life cycle for each project,
based on the project’s inherent
▶ Adaptive life cycles can be iterative, or incremental.
characteristics. The project life
The scope is outlined and agreed before the start of
cycle needs to be flexible enough
an iteration. Adaptive life cycles are also referred to
as agile or change-driven life cycles. to deal with the variety of factors
included in the project.
▹
In an iterative life cycle, the project scope is
generally determined early in the project life Project life cycles are independent
cycle, but time and cost estimates are routinely of product life cycles, which
modified as the project team’s understanding may be produced by a project.
of the product increases. Iterations develop the A product life cycle is the series of
product through a series of repeated cycles, phases that represent the evolution
while increments successively add to the of a product, from concept through
functionality of the product. delivery, growth, maturity, and
▹ to retirement.
In an incremental life cycle, the deliverable
is produced through a series of iterations
that successively add functionality within a
predetermined time frame. The deliverable
contains the necessary and sufficient
capability to be considered complete only
after the final iteration.
▶ A hybrid life cycle is a combination of a predictive and
an adaptive life cycle. Those elements of the project
that are well known or have fixed requirements
follow a predictive development life cycle, and those
elements that are still evolving follow an adaptive
development life cycle.
Planning is Always There
A key thing to remember about life cycles is that each life cycle shares the element of planning.
What differentiates a life cycle is not whether planning is done, but rather how much planning is
done, when, and by whom. Agile approaches engage the team more in planning while predictive
approaches are driven by the project manager.
For predictive approaches, the plan drives the work. More planning is performed up front and
requirements are identified in more detail when compared to adaptive approaches. The team
estimates when they can deliver which deliverables and performs comprehensive procurement
activities.
In iterative approaches, prototypes and proofs are also planned, but the outputs are intended
to modify the plans created in the beginning. Meanwhile, incremental initiatives plan to deliver
successive subsets of the overall project. Teams may plan several successive deliveries in advance
or only one at a time. The deliveries inform the future project work.
Agile projects also plan. The key difference is that the team plans and replans as more information
becomes available from review of frequent deliveries. Regardless of the project life cycle, the
project requires planning.
1.7.2 PROJECT PHASE
A project phase is a collection of logically related project activities that culminates in the
completion of one or more deliverables. The phases in a life cycle can be described by a variety of
attributes. Attributes may be measurable and unique to a specific phase. Attributes may include
but are not limited to:
▶ Name (e.g., Phase A, Phase B, Phase 1, Phase 2, proposal phase),
▶ Number (e.g., three phases in the project, five phases in the project),
▶ Duration (e.g., 1 week, 1 month, 1 quarter),
▶ Resource requirements (e.g., people, buildings, equipment),
Planning is Always There ▶ Entrance criteria for a project to move into that phase (e.g., specified approvals
documented, specified documents completed), and
A key thing to remember about life cycles is that each life cycle shares the element of planning.
What differentiates a life cycle is not whether planning is done, but rather how much planning is ▶ Exit criteria for a project to complete a phase (e.g., documented approvals, completed
done, when, and by whom. Agile approaches engage the team more in planning while predictive documents, completed deliverables).
approaches are driven by the project manager.
Projects may be separated into distinct phases or subcomponents. These phases or
For predictive approaches, the plan drives the work. More planning is performed up front and
subcomponents are generally given names that indicate the type of work done in that phase.
requirements are identified in more detail when compared to adaptive approaches. The team
Examples of phase names include but are not limited to:
estimates when they can deliver which deliverables and performs comprehensive procurement
▶ Concept development,
activities.
▶ Feasibility study,
In iterative approaches, prototypes and proofs are also planned, but the outputs are intended
to modify the plans created in the beginning. Meanwhile, incremental initiatives plan to deliver ▶ Customer requirements,
successive subsets of the overall project. Teams may plan several successive deliveries in advance
▶ Solution development,
or only one at a time. The deliveries inform the future project work.
▶ Design,
Agile projects also plan. The key difference is that the team plans and replans as more information
becomes available from review of frequent deliveries. Regardless of the project life cycle, the ▶ Prototype,
project requires planning.
▶ Build,
▶ Test,
▶ Transition,
▶ Commissioning,
▶ Milestone review, and
▶ Lessons learned.
Establishing Project Phases
The project phases may be established based on various factors including but not limited to:
▶ Management needs;
▶ Nature of the project;
▶ Unique characteristics of the organization, industry, or technology;
▶ Project elements including, but not limited to, technology, engineering, business, process,
or legal; and
▶ Decision points (e.g., funding, project go/no-go, and milestone review).
Using multiple phases may provide better insight to managing the project. It also provides an
opportunity to assess the project performance and take necessary corrective or preventive actions
in subsequent phases. A key component used with project phases is the phase gate or review
(see Section 1.7.3).
1.7.3 PHASE GATE
A phase gate (or review) is held at the end of a phase. The project’s performance and progress
are compared to project and business documents including but not limited to:
▶ Project business case,
▶ Project charter,
▶ Project management plan, and
▶ Benefits management plan.
A decision (e.g., go/no-go decision) is made as a result of this comparison to:
Establishing Project Phases ▶ Continue to the next phase,
The project phases may be established based on various factors including but not limited to: ▶ Continue to the next phase with modification,
▶ Management needs; ▶ End the project,
▶ Nature of the project; ▶ Remain in the phase, or
▶ Unique characteristics of the organization, industry, or technology; ▶ Repeat the phase or elements of it.
▶ Project elements including, but not limited to, technology, engineering, business, process,
Depending on the organization, industry, or type of work, phase gates may be referred to
or legal; and
by other terms, such as phase review, stage gate, kill point, and phase entrance or phase exit.
▶ Decision points (e.g., funding, project go/no-go, and milestone review). Organizations may use these reviews to examine other pertinent items which are beyond the scope
of this guide, such as product-related documents or models.
Using multiple phases may provide better insight to managing the project. It also provides an
opportunity to assess the project performance and take necessary corrective or preventive actions
in subsequent phases. A key component used with project phases is the phase gate or review
1.7.4 PROJECT MANAGEMENT PROCESSES
(see Section 1.7.3).
The project life cycle is managed by executing a series of project management activities known
as project management processes. There are a total of 49 processes; however, the selection of
processes used for any given project depends on the organization and the project—more than likely,
all processes will not be used. The outputs can be deliverables or outcomes. Outcomes are the end
result of a process. Project management processes apply globally across industries.
Project management processes are logically linked by the outputs they produce. Processes may
contain overlapping activities that occur throughout the project. The output of one process generally
results in either:
▶ An input to another process, or
▶ A deliverable of the project or project phase.
Figure 1-5 shows an example of how inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs relate to each
other within a process, and with other processes.
Inputs Tools & Techniques Outputs
1. Input H 1. Technique A 1. Project Output A
2. Input J 2. Tool C 2. Project Output B
Figure 1-5. Example Process: Inputs, Tools & Techniques, and Outputs
The number of process iterations and interactions between processes varies based on the
needs of the project. Processes generally fall into one of three categories:
▶ Processes used once or at predefined points in the project. The processes Develop Project
Charter and Close Project or Phase are examples.
▶ Processes that are performed periodically as needed. The process Acquire Resources is
performed as resources are needed. The process Conduct Procurements is performed prior
to needing the procured item.
▶ Processes that are performed continuously throughout the project. The process
Define Activities may occur throughout the project life cycle, especially if the project uses
rolling wave planning or an adaptive development approach. Many of the Monitoring and
Controlling processes are ongoing from the start of the project, until it is closed out.
Project management is accomplished through the appropriate application and integration of
logically grouped project management processes. While there are different ways of grouping processes,
PMI groups processes into five categories called Process Groups (see Section 1.7.5).
1.7.5 PROJECT MANAGEMENT PROCESS GROUPS
A Project Management Process Group is a logical grouping of project management processes
to achieve specific project objectives. Process Groups are independent of project phases. Project
management processes are grouped into the following five Project Management Process Groups:
▶ Initiating Process Group. Those processes performed to define a new project or a new
phase of an existing project by obtaining authorization to start the project or phase.
▶ Planning Process Group. Those processes required to establish the scope of the project,
refine the objectives, and define the course of action required to attain the objectives that
the project was undertaken to achieve.
▶ Executing Process Group. Those processes performed to complete the work defined in the
project management plan to satisfy the project requirements.
▶ Monitoring and Controlling Process Group. Those processes required to track, review, and
regulate the progress and performance of the project; identify any areas in which changes
to the plan are required; and initiate the corresponding changes.
▶ Closing Process Group. Those processes performed to formally complete or close the project,
phase, or contract.
Process flow diagrams are used throughout this practice guide. The project management
processes are linked by specific inputs and outputs where the result or outcome of one process may
become the input to another process that is not necessarily in the same Process Group. Note that
Process Groups are not the same as project phases.
Table 1-4 provides a list of the 49 processes mapped to their respective Process Groups. The
numbers refer to the section numbers in this practice guide.
Table 1-4. Process Groups and Project Management Processes
Project Management Process Groups
Initiating Planning Executing Monitoring Closing
Process Process Process and Controlling Process
Group Group Group Process Group Group
4.1 Develop 5.1 Develop Project 6.1 Direct and 7.1 Monitor and 8.1 Close Project
Project Charter Management Plan Manage Project Control Project or Phase
Work Work
4.2 Identify 5.2 Plan Scope
Stakeholders Management 6.2 Manage Project 7.2 Perform
Knowledge Integrated
5.3 Collect
Change Control
Requirements 6.3 Manage Quality
7.3 Validate Scope
5.4 Define Scope 6.4 Acquire Key Terminology Regarding Project Data and Information
Resources 7.4 Control Scope
5.5 Create WBS
5.6 Plan Schedule
6.5 Develop Team 7.5 Control Project data are regularly collected and analyzed throughout the project life cycle. The following
Schedule
Management 6.6 Manage Team definitions identify key terminology regarding project data and information:
7.6 Control Costs
5.7 Define 6.7 Manage
Activities Communications 7.7 Control Quality ▶ Work performance data. The raw observations and measurements identified during activities
5.8 Sequence 6.8 Implement Risk 7.8 Control performed to carry out the project work. Examples include reported percentage of work
Activities Responses Resources
physically completed, quality and technical performance measures, start and finish dates
5.9 Estimate 6.9 Conduct 7.9 Monitor
Activity Durations Procurements Communications of schedule activities, number of change requests, number of defects, actual costs, actual
5.10 Develop 6.10 Manage 7.10 Monitor Risks
durations, etc. Project data are usually recorded in a project management information system
Schedule Stakeholder
7.11 Control
5.11 Plan Cost Engagement Procurements (PMIS) and in project documents.
Management
7.12 Monitor
5.12 Estimate Costs Stakeholder ▶ Work performance information. The performance data collected from various controlling
Engagement
5.13 Determine processes, analyzed in context and integrated based on relationships across areas. Examples
Budget
of performance information are status of deliverables, implementation status for change
5.14 Plan Quality
Management requests, and forecast estimates to complete.
5.15 Plan Resource
Management ▶ Work performance reports. The physical or electronic representation of work performance
5.16 Estimate Activity information compiled in project documents, which is intended to generate decisions or
Resources
raise issues, actions, or awareness. Examples include status reports, memos, justifications,
5.17 Plan
Communications information notes, electronic dashboards, recommendations, and updates.
Management
5.18 Plan Risk
Management
5.19 Identify Risks
5.20 Perform
Qualitative Risk
Analysis
5.21 Perform
Quantitative
Risk Analysis
5.22 Plan Risk
Responses
5.23 Plan
Procurement
Management
5.24 Plan
Stakeholder
Engagement
1.8 PROJECT MANAGEMENT DATA AND INFORMATION
Throughout the life cycle of a project, a significant amount of data is collected, analyzed, and
transformed. Project data are collected as a result of various processes and are shared within the
project team. The collected data are analyzed in context, aggregated, and transformed to become
project information during various processes. Information is communicated verbally or stored and
distributed in various formats as reports.
Key Terminology Regarding Project Data and Information
Project data are regularly collected and analyzed throughout the project life cycle. The following
definitions identify key terminology regarding project data and information:
▶ Work performance data. The raw observations and measurements identified during activities
performed to carry out the project work. Examples include reported percentage of work
physically completed, quality and technical performance measures, start and finish dates
of schedule activities, number of change requests, number of defects, actual costs, actual
durations, etc. Project data are usually recorded in a project management information system
(PMIS) and in project documents.
▶ Work performance information. The performance data collected from various controlling
processes, analyzed in context and integrated based on relationships across areas. Examples
of performance information are status of deliverables, implementation status for change
requests, and forecast estimates to complete.
▶ Work performance reports. The physical or electronic representation of work performance
information compiled in project documents, which is intended to generate decisions or
raise issues, actions, or awareness. Examples include status reports, memos, justifications,
information notes, electronic dashboards, recommendations, and updates.
Figure 1-6 shows the flow of project information across the various processes used in managing
a project.
Executing
Processes
• Work performance data
Controlling
Processes
• Project management plan
• Work performance information
and project documents updates
Overall
Project Control
• Work performance reports
Project Change Various Project Project
Control Processes Communications
• Approved
change
requests
• Project team members
• Project stakeholders
Figure 1-6. Project Data, Information, and Report Flow
1.9 TAILORING
Sound project mana-
Usually, project managers apply a project gement methodologies
management methodology to their work. A methodology take into account the
is a system of practices, techniques, procedures, and rules unique nature of projects and
used by those who work in a discipline. Specific methodology allow tailoring, to some extent,
recommendations are outside the scope of this practice guide. by the project manager.
Project management methodologies may be: Tailoring produces direct and
▶ Developed by experts within the organization, indirect benefits to organizations.
These include, but are not
▶ Purchased from vendors,
limited to:
▶ Obtained from professional associations, or
▶ More commitment from
▶ Acquired from government agencies. project team members who
helped to tailor the approach,
Tailoring is the deliberate adaptation of approach,
▶ Customer-oriented focus,
governance, and processes to make them more suitable for the
as the needs of the customer
given environment and the task(s) at hand.
are an important influencing
In a project environment, tailoring includes considering
factor in its development, and
the approaches, processes, interim deliverables, and choice
of people to engage with. The tailoring process is driven by a ▶ More efficient use of
mindset and set of values that influence the tailoring decisions. project resources.
The project manager collaborates with the project team,
sponsor, organizational management, or combination thereof,
in the tailoring. In some cases, an organization may require that
specific project management methodologies be used.
Tailoring is necessary because each project is unique.
Not every process, tool, technique, input, or output identified
in this practice guide is required on every project. Tailoring
should address the competing constraints of scope, schedule,
cost, resources, quality, and risk. The importance of each
constraint is different for each project, and the project
manager tailors the approach to manage these constraints
based on the project environment, organizational culture,
stakeholder needs, and other variables.
In tailoring project management, the project manager should also consider the varying levels of
governance that may be required and within which the project will operate, as well as considering the
culture of the organization (see Section 2.3). In addition, consideration of whether the customer of the
project is internal or external to the organization may affect project management tailoring decisions.
The PMBOK Guide® – Seventh Edition outlines a four-step tailoring process:
▶ Step 1: Select Initial Development Approach—This step determines the development
approach that will be used for the project. Project teams apply their knowledge of the
product, delivery cadence, and awareness of the available options to select the most
appropriate development approach for the situation.
▶ Step 2: Tailor for the Organization—While project teams own and improve their processes,
organizations often require some level of approval and oversight. Many organizations have
a project methodology, general management approach, or general development approach
that is used as a starting point for their projects. Organizations that have established process
governance need to ensure tailoring is aligned to policy. To demonstrate that the project
team's tailoring decisions do not threaten the organization's larger strategic or stewardship
goals, project teams may need to justify using a tailored approach.
▶ Step 3: Tailor for the Project—Many attributes influence tailoring for the project. These
include, but are not limited to, product/deliverable, project team, and culture. The project
team should ask questions about each attribute to help guide them in the tailoring process.
Answers to these questions can help identify the need to tailor processes, delivery approach,
life cycle, tools, methods, and artifacts.
▶ Step 4: Implement Ongoing Improvement—The process of tailoring is not a single,
one-time exercise. During progressive elaboration, issues with how the project team is
working, how the product or deliverable is evolving, and other learnings will indicate where
further tailoring could bring improvements. Review points, phase gates, and retrospectives
all provide opportunities to inspect and adapt the process, development approach, and
delivery frequency as necessary.
1.10 BENEFITS MANAGEMENT AND BUSINESS DOCUMENTS
Projects are initiated to realize opportunities that are aligned with an organization’s strategic
goals. Prior to initiating a project, a business case is often developed to outline the project objectives,
the required investment, and financial and qualitative criteria for project success. The business case
provides the basis to measure success and progress throughout the project life cycle by comparing
the results with the objectives and the identified success criteria. The business case may be used
before project initiation and may result in a go/no-go decision for the project.
A needs assessment often precedes the business case. The needs assessment involves
understanding business goals and objectives, issues, and opportunities and recommending proposals
to address them. The results of the needs assessment may be summarized in the business case
document.
Projects are typically initiated as a result of one or more of the following strategic
considerations:
▶ Market demand,
▶ Strategic opportunity/business need,
▶ Social need,
▶ Environmental consideration,
▶ Customer request,
▶ Technological advancement,
▶ Legal or regulatory requirement, and
▶ Existing or forecasted problem.
A benefits management plan describes how and when the benefits of the project will be
delivered and how they will be measured. The benefits management plan may include the following:
▶ Target benefits. The expected tangible and intangible business value to be gained by the
implementation of the product, service, or result.
▶ Strategic alignment. How the project benefits support and align with the business
strategies of the organization.
▶ Time frame for realizing benefits. Benefits by phase: short term, long term, and ongoing.
▶ Benefits owner. The accountable person or group that monitors, records, and reports
realized benefits throughout the time frame established in the plan.
▶ Metrics. The direct and indirect measurements used to show the benefits realized.
▶ Risks. Risks associated with achieving target benefits.
The success of the project is measured against the project objectives and success criteria.
In many cases, the success of the product, service, or result is not known until sometime after the
project is complete. For example, an increase in market share, a decrease in operating expenses,
or the success of a new product may not be known when the project is transitioned to operations.
In these circumstances, the project management office (PMO), portfolio steering committee, or
some other business function within the organization should evaluate the success at a later date to
determine if the outcomes met the business objectives.
Development and maintenance of the project benefits management plan is an iterative activity.
This document complements the business case, project charter, and project management plan. The
project manager works with the sponsor to ensure that the project charter, project management
plan, and the benefits management plan remain in alignment throughout the life cycle of the project.
See Business Analysis for Practitioners: A Practice Guide [3], The Standard for Program Management [4],
and The Standard for Portfolio Management [5].
A project manager needs to ensure that the project
management approach captures the intent of business Both the business
documents. These documents are defined in Table 1-5. These case and the benefits
two documents are interdependent and iteratively developed management plan are
and maintained throughout the life cycle of the project. developed prior to the project
being initiated. Additionally, both
The project sponsor is generally accountable for the
documents are referenced after
development and maintenance of the project business case
the project has been completed.
document. The project manager is responsible for providing
recommendations and oversight to keep the project Therefore, they are considered
business case, project management plan, project charter, business documents rather than
and project benefits management plan success measures project documents or components
in alignment with one another and with the goals and of the project management plan.
objectives of the organization. As appropriate, these business
documents may be inputs to
some of the processes involved
in managing the project, such as
developing the project charter.
Table 1-5. Project Business Documents
Project Business Documents Definition
Project business case A documented economic feasibility study used to establish the validity of the benefits
of a selected component lacking sufficient definition and that is used as a basis for
the authorization of further project management activities.
Project benefits management plan The documented explanation defining the processes for creating, maximizing, and
sustaining the benefits provided by a project.
Project managers tailor the noted project management documents for their projects.
In some organizations, the business case and benefits management plan are maintained at the
program level. Project managers then work with the appropriate program managers to ensure the
project management documents are aligned with the program documents. Figure 1-7 illustrates
the interrelationship of these critical project management business documents and the needs
assessment. Figure 1-7 shows an approximation of the life cycle of these various documents against
the project life cycle.
Project Life Cycle
Pre-Project Starting Organizing Carrying Out Completing
Work the Project and Preparing the Work the Project
Time Line
Needs
Assessment
Phase
Gate
Business
Case
Project
Charter
Benefits Project
Management Management
Plan Plan
Generic Phases
Figure 1-7. Interrelationship of Needs Assessment and Critical Business/Project Documents
1.11 PROJECT CHARTER, PROJECT MANAGEMENT PLAN,
AND PROJECT DOCUMENTS
The project charter is defined as a document issued by the project sponsor that formally
authorizes the existence of a project and provides the project manager with the authority to apply
organizational resources to project activities.
The project management plan is defined as the document that describes how the project will be
executed, monitored, and controlled. It integrates and consolidates all of the subsidiary management
plans and baselines, and other information that is essential for managing the project. The individual
aspects of the project determine which components of the project management plan are needed.
Project management plan components include but are not limited to:
▶ Subsidiary management plans:
▹
Scope management plan. Establishes how the scope will be defined, developed, monitored,
controlled, and validated.
▹
Requirements management plan. Establishes how the requirements will be analyzed,
documented, and managed.
▹
Schedule management plan. Establishes the criteria and the activities for developing,
monitoring, and controlling the schedule.
▹
Cost management plan. Establishes how the costs will be planned, structured, and controlled.
▹
Quality management plan. Establishes how an organization´s quality policies,
methodologies, and standards will be implemented in the project.
▹
Resource management plan. Provides guidance on how project resources should be
categorized, allocated, managed, and released.
▹
Communications management plan. Establishes how, when, and by whom information
about the project will be administered and disseminated.
▹
Risk management plan. Establishes how the risk activities will be structured and
performed.
▹
Procurement management plan. Establishes how the project team will acquire goods
and services from outside of the performing organization.
▹
Stakeholder engagement plan. Establishes how stakeholders will be engaged in project
decisions and execution, according to their needs, interests, and impact.
▶ Baselines:
▹
Scope baseline. The approved version of a scope statement, work breakdown structure
(WBS), and its associated WBS dictionary, which can be changed using formal change
control procedures and is used as a basis for comparison.
▹
Schedule baseline. The approved version of a schedule model that can be changed
using formal change control procedures and is used as a basis for comparison to the
actual results.
▹
Cost baseline. The approved version of the time-phased project budget, excluding any
management reserves, which can be changed using formal change control procedures
and is used as a basis for comparison to the actual results.
▶ Additional components. Most components of the project management plan are produced
as outputs from other processes, though some are produced during this process. Those
components developed as part of this process will be dependent on the project; however,
they often include but are not limited to:
▹
Change management plan. Describes how the change requests throughout the project
will be formally authorized and incorporated.
▹
Configuration management plan. Describes how the information about the items of the
project (and which items) will be recorded and updated so that the product, service,
or result of the project remains consistent and/or operative.
▹
Performance measurement baseline. An integrated scope-schedule-cost plan for the project
work against which project execution is compared to measure and manage performance.
▹
Project life cycle. Describes the series of phases that a project passes through from its
initiation to its closure.
▹
Development approach. Describes the product, service, or result and development
approach, such as a predictive, adaptive, or hybrid model.
▹
Management reviews. Identifies the points in the project when the project manager and
relevant stakeholders will review the project progress to determine if performance is as
expected, or if preventive or corrective actions are necessary.
While the project management plan is one of the primary documents used to manage the
project, other project documents are also used. These other documents are not part of the project
management plan; however, they are necessary to manage the project effectively. Table 1-6 is a
representative list of the project management plan components and project documents.
Table 1-6. Project Management Plan and Project Documents
Project Management Plan Project Documents
1. Scope management plan 1. Activity attributes 19. Quality control measurements
2. Requirements management plan 2. Activity list 20. Quality metrics
3. Schedule management plan 3. Assumption log 21. Quality report
4. Cost management plan 4. Basis of estimates 22. Requirements documentation
5. Quality management plan 5. Change log 23. Requirements traceability matrix
6. Resource management plan 6. Cost estimates 24. Resource breakdown structure
7. Communications management plan 7. Cost forecasts 25. Resource calendars
8. Risk management plan 8. Duration estimates 26. Resource requirements
9. Procurement management plan 9. Issue log 27. Risk register
10. Stakeholder engagement plan 10. Lessons learned register 28. Risk report
11. Change management plan 11. Milestone list 29. Schedule data
12. Configuration management plan 12. Physical resource assignments 30. Schedule forecasts
13. Scope baseline 13. Project calendars 31. Stakeholder register
14. Schedule baseline 14. Project communications 32. Team charter
15. Cost baseline 15. Project schedule 33. Test and evaluation documents
16. Performance measurement baseline 16. Project schedule network diagram
17. Project life cycle description 17. Project scope statement
18. Development approach 18. Project team assignments
1.12 PROJECT SUCCESS MEASURES
One of the most common challenges in project management is determining whether or not
a project is successful.
Traditionally, the project management metrics of time, cost, scope, and quality have been the
most important factors in defining the success of a project. More recently, practitioners and scholars
have determined that project success should also be measured with consideration toward achievement
of the project objectives.
Project stakeholders may have different ideas as to what the successful completion of a project
will look like and which factors are the most important. It is critical to clearly document the project
objectives and to select objectives that are measurable. Three questions that the key stakeholders
and the project manager should answer are:
▶ What does success look like for this project?
▶ How will success be measured?
▶ What factors may impact success?
The answer to these questions should be documented and agreed upon by the key
stakeholders and the project manager.
Project success may include additional criteria linked to the organizational strategy and to the
delivery of business results. These project objectives may include but are not limited to:
▶ Completing the project benefits management plan;
▶ Meeting the agreed-upon financial measures documented in the business case. These
financial measures may include but are not limited to:
▹
Net present value (NPV),
▹
Return on investment (ROI),
▹
Internal rate of return (IRR),
▹
Payback period (PBP), and
▹
Benefit-cost ratio (BCR).
▶ Meeting business case nonfinancial objectives;
▶ Completing movement of an organization from its current state to the desired future state;
▶ Fulfilling contract terms and conditions;
▶ Meeting organizational strategy, goals, and objectives;
▶ Achieving stakeholder satisfaction;
▶ Acceptable customer/end-user adoption;
▶ Integration of deliverables into the organization’s operating environment;
▶ Achieving agreed-upon quality of delivery;
▶ Meeting governance criteria; and
▶ Achieving other agreed-upon success measures or criteria (e.g., process throughput).
The project team needs to be able to assess the project situation, balance the demands, and
maintain proactive communication with stakeholders in order to deliver a successful project.
When the business alignment for a project is constant, the chance for project success greatly
increases because the project remains aligned with the strategic direction of the organization.
It is possible for a project to be successful from a scope/schedule/budget viewpoint, and to be
unsuccessful from a business viewpoint. This can occur when there is a change in the business needs
or the market environment before the project is completed.