5 Practice Creative Procrastination
Make time for getting big tasks done every day. Plan your daily
workload in advance. Single out the relatively few small jobs that
absolutely must be done immediately in the morning. Then go
directly to the big tasks and pursue them to completion.
BOARDROOM REPORTS
Creative procrastination is one of the most effective of all personal performance
techniques. It can change your life.
The fact is that you can’t do everything that you have to do. You have to
procrastinate on something. Therefore, deliberately and consciously
procrastinate on small tasks. Put off eating smaller or less ugly frogs. Eat the
biggest and ugliest frogs before anything else. Do the worst first!
Everyone procrastinates. The difference between high performers and low
performers is largely determined by what they choose to procrastinate on.
Since you must procrastinate anyway, decide today to procrastinate on low-
value activities. Decide to procrastinate on, outsource, delegate, and eliminate
those activities that don’t make much of a contribution to your life in any case.
Get rid of the tadpoles and focus on the frogs.
Priorities versus Posteriorities
Here is a key point. To set proper priorities, you must set posteriorities as well.
A priority is something that you do more of and sooner, while a posteriority is
something that you do less of and later, if at all.
Rule: You can get your time and your life under control only to the degree to
which you discontinue lower-value activities.

One of the most powerful of all words in time management is the word no!
Say it politely. Say it clearly so that there are no misunderstandings. Say it
regularly as a normal part of your time management vocabulary.
Warren Buffett, one of the richest men in the world, was once asked his secret
of success. He replied, “Simple. I just say no to everything that is not absolutely
vital to me at the moment.”
Say no to anything that is not a high-value use of your time and your life. Say
no graciously but firmly to avoid agreeing to something against your will. Say it
early and say it often. Remember that you have no spare time. As we say, “Your
dance card is full.”
For you to do something new, you must complete or stop doing something
old. Getting in requires getting out. Picking up means putting down.
Creative procrastination is the act of thoughtfully and deliberately deciding
upon the exact things you are not going to do right now, if ever.
Procrastinate on Purpose
Most people engage in unconscious procrastination. They procrastinate without
thinking about it. As a result, they procrastinate on the big, valuable, important
tasks that can have significant long-term consequences in their lives and careers.
You must avoid this common tendency at all costs.
Your job is to deliberately procrastinate on tasks that are of low value so that
you have more time for tasks that can make a big difference in your life and
work. Continually review your duties and responsibilities to identify time-
consuming tasks and activities that you can abandon with no real loss. This is an
ongoing responsibility for you that never ends.
For example, a friend of mine was an avid golfer when he was single. He
liked to golf three or four times a week, three to four hours each time. Over a
period of years, he started a business, got married, and had two children. But he
still played golf three to four times a week until he finally realized that his time
on the golf course was causing him enormous stress at home and at the office.
Only by abandoning most of his golf games could he get his life back under
control. And he did. He cut back to one round of golf per week and transformed
his life, especially his home life.
Set Posteriorities on Time-Consuming Activities
Continually review your life and work to find time-consuming tasks and

activities that you can abandon. Cut down on television watching and Internet
surfing and instead spend the time with your family, read, exercise, or do
something else that enhances the quality of your life.
Look at your work activities and identify the tasks that you could delegate or
eliminate to free up more time for the work that really counts. Begin today to
practice creative procrastination. Set posteriorities wherever and whenever you
can. This decision alone can enable you to get your time and your life under
control.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Practice “zero-based thinking” in every part of your life. Ask yourself
continually, “If I were not doing this already, knowing what I now know,
would I start doing it again today?” If it is something you would not start
again today, knowing what you now know, it is a prime candidate for
abandonment or creative procrastination.
2. Examine each of your personal and work activities and evaluate it based
on your current situation. Select at least one activity to abandon
immediately or at least deliberately put off until your more important goals
have been achieved.