CHAPTER 14
Be a Conference Commando
Military strategists know that most battles are won before
the first shot is fired by the side that determines where,
when, and how an engagement is fought. And so it is with most
successful conferences. Turning a conference into your own turf
and setting goals ahead of time is what turns a casual conference
attendance into a mission.
Don't just be an attendee; be a conference commando!
Conferences are good for mainly one thing. No, it's not the cof
fee and cookies at breaks. It's not even pricey business enlighten
ment. They provide a forum to meet the kind of like-minded
people who can help you fulfill your mission and goals. Before
deciding to attend a conference, I sometimes informally go so far
as using a simple return-on-investment-type thought process. Is
the likely return I'll get from the relationships I establish and build
equal to or greater than the price of the conference and the time
I spend there? If so, I attend. If not, I don't. It's that simple. That
may seem like an awfully pragmatic view of conferences, but it
works.
Right after we sold YaYa, the new owners instituted a set of
cost-cutting policies relative to travel and conferences. I thought
the policies were fundamentally off the mark.
The owners saw conferences as boondoggles—pleasant affairs
for indulgent executives rather than as revenue generators. To our
new parent company, the costs of sending people to a few events
each year seemed like an unnecessary expense on a start-up com
pany's balance sheet.
I strongly disagreed and promised to convince them other
wise. I set about recording the actual number of revenue-generating
projects that came directly from people I had met at conferences.
The owners were stunned when I presented a spreadsheet show
ing successive deals and how a significant chunk of revenue could
be traced back to one conference or another.
Their ill-tempered disposition toward these business get-
togethers—and these executives are far from alone in holding
such attitudes—stems from an all-too-common misperception
that conferences are places to find insight. Wrong. Real, action
able insight mostly comes from experience, books, and other
people. Roundtable discussions and keynote speeches can be fun,
even inspirational, but rarely is there the time to impart true
knowledge.
But there may be no better place to extend your professional
network and, on occasion, get deals done. Let me give you an
example based on sales. In the old model of selling, 80 percent of
a salesperson's time went into setting up meetings, giving a pre
sentation, and trying to close a deal. The other 20 percent was
spent developing a relationship with the customer. Today, we
focus mostly on relationship selling. Smart salespeople—in fact,
smart employees and business owners of all stripes—spend 80
percent of their time building strong relationships with the people
they do business with. The slickest PowerPoint presentation can't
compete with the development of real affection and trust in cap
turing the hearts and minds of other people.
Those who use conferences properly have a huge leg up at your
average industry gathering. While others quietly sit taking notes,
content to sip their free bottled water, these men and women are
setting up one-on-one meetings, organizing dinners, and, in gen
eral, making each conference an opportunity to meet people who
could change their lives.
If these people seem as if they aren't playing by the same rules
as their fellow attendees, you're right. They've gone well beyond
the traditional, warmed-over advice to Wear Your Badge, Warmly
Greet Everyone, Establish Firm Eye Contact, and other common
refrains that fail to distinguish them from the rest of the horde.
Yes, there's a guide to getting the most out of a conference. My
friend Paul Reddy, a software executive, claims people are either
bowling balls or pins at a conference. If you're the ball, you walk
(or roll) into a conference, event, or an organization, and you
blow it apart. With a dash of bravado and ingenuity, you leave a
positive impression in your wake, create friendships, and achieve
the goals on your agenda. The pins sit placidly by, waiting for
something, anything, to happen to them.
Don't think of your next conference as a business-related retreat.
Think of it as a well-coordinated campaign to further your mission.
Here are the rules I follow at each and every event I attend:
Help the Organizer (Better Yet, Be the Organizer)
Conferences are logistical nightmares. There are a thousand
different things that go into pulling off a successful business gath
ering. The mess that can ensue is an opportunity for you to come
in and help out—and become an insider in the process.
Once you're on the inside, you can find out who will be attend
ing and what the hot events will be. And you'll find yourself at all
those unlisted dinners and cocktail parties that are thrown for the
conference poobahs.
How do you find yourself part of the process? It's not really all
that hard. First, review the event's materials, visit its Web site, and
find out who the main contact is for putting together the confer
ence. Put in a phone call. The person responsible for these kinds of
events is generally overworked and stressed out. I like to call these
people a few months ahead of the event and say, "I'm really looking
forward to the conference you're putting together. I'm interested in
helping make this year be the best year ever, and I'm willing to
devote a chunk of my resources—be it time, creativity, or connec
tions—to make this year's event a smash hit. How can I help?"
I guarantee the coordinator will be shocked with delight. I say
that because I was once responsible for those stressed-out plan
ners back in my early days as CMO of Deloitte.
Deloitte Consulting was working with Michael Hammer to
grow a credible reengineering practice. We thought a conference
might be a great way to introduce our relationship with Michael
to the market, strengthen our brand, and win a few customers to
boot. So we proposed a joint conference hosted by Deloitte and
Michael Hammer. We would bring the industry expertise and case
studies, and Michael would bring his expertise in reengineering
and his understanding of how to run a world-class conference.
It gave me a chance to see the inner workings of how a success
ful conference is orchestrated and of course build a great relation
ship with Mike. I became acutely aware of how powerful it was to
know, in advance, who would be attending; why some speakers
were chosen and some were not; and what the best forums were
for networking.
From the outset, our idea was to apply some method to the
usual conference madness. A tracking system was put in place that
recorded daily our progress against the objectives we set for our
selves. Each Deloitte partner's objective was to meet two people who
were assigned to them from the guests we knew would be attending.
Each was given one person as a primary target—someone we really
wanted to win as a client. The other person was someone we
thought Deloitte would benefit from knowing, perhaps a member
of the media. The basic goal remained, quite simply, to meet new
people.
Because we knew who was attending beforehand, the partners
got a one-page bio on the people assigned them, listing who they
were, what they did, their accomplishments and hobbies, and the
potential challenges their company faced that Deloitte might be
able to address. This was enough information to make a real con
nection when the partner finally met the individual.
We also gave the partners a list of ideas of how to actually catch
up with their targets and what to say when they met them. At
the end of each day, the partners would report whom they met,
where, and how the encounter went. If someone had a difficult
time meeting their target person, we strategized for the next day,
making sure that the partner and the individual they were
assigned to would sit at the same dinner table the following
evening, or I'd make a point of making the introduction myself, or
we'd ask Mike to make an intro in a few cases.
What I had unknowingly created was a unit of conference
commandos, prepared in advance with information on who they
were to meet, how (we had done research), and where. The results
were astounding. The conference was packed. As a result, Deloitte
saw an unprecedented amount of business come its way. We have
since perfected this art at FerrazziGreenlight, and not only do we
advise companies on how to get the most out of their conferences,
but also big conference-givers like Forbes and PeopleSoft come to
us to help them design conferences that will have world-class out
comes for both these companies and their conference attendees.
The key is to work hard to make the conference a success for
everyone. At the Hammer conference, all attendees, almost across
the board, were shocked by how much business they got done.
The right environment was set for networking success.
Of course, Michael Hammer was brilliant, as always, and there
was much for all of us to learn from him on content. But every
one's success came from organizing a conference around its real
function: an intimate gathering of like-minded professionals in an
atmosphere that facilitates profitable relationships.
Listen. Better Yet, Speak
Are you someone who thinks becoming a speaker is a big deal?
That's true for a lot of people. I'm here to tell you it's not as tough
as you might think, but it is also perhaps more important than
you can imagine
Nothing frightens the daylights out of some people like the
thought of spending fifteen minutes talking about what they do in
front of an audience, even if the audience is made up of generally
receptive folks (like family and friends!).
Calm yourself. First, you should know that giving speeches is
one of the easiest and most effective ways to get yourself, your
business, and your ideas seen, heard of, and remembered, and you
don't need to be Tony Robbins to find yourself a forum of people
willing to hear you out.
How many people find themselves in front of an audience on
any given day? The numbers are shocking. There are thousands of
forums and events going on—for every imaginable reason—each
and every day. All these forums need a warm body to say some
thing the slightest bit inspiring or insightful to their guests. Most
speakers, unfortunately, deliver neither.
If you think the people delivering this insight are only those at
the top of their respective fields, you're mistaken. So how do you
get experience?
Toastmasters International, for instance, provides a forum for
the development of speaking skills. With more than 8,000 clubs
meeting weekly in groups of up to thirty or forty people, there are
a whole lot of speeches, and speakers, being made. On a larger
scale, the national speaker circuit is huge. The American Society of
Association Executives (ASAE) says the meetings industry is a
nearly $83 billion market, with over $56 billion being spent annu
ally on conventions and seminars alone. That ranks conferences—
get this!—as the twenty-third-largest contributor to the Gross
National Product. The point here is that the opportunity to speak
exists everywhere, paid or unpaid. It's fun, it can be profitable, and
there's no better way to get yourself known—and get to know oth
ers—at an event. Study after study shows that the more speeches
one gives, the higher one's income bracket tends to be.
As a speaker at a conference, you have a special status, making
meeting people much easier. Attendees expect you to reach out
and greet them. They, in turn, give you respect that they don't
accord their fellow attendees. Instant credibility and faux-fame is
bestowed upon you when you're on a stage (and pretty much any
stage, at that).
How do you become a speaker at a conference? First, you need
something to say: You need content (which I'll discuss in another
chapter). You need to develop a spiel about the niche you occupy.
In fact, you can develop a number of different spiels, catering to a
number of different audiences (again, I'll get to that later).
If you take the first step and get to know the organizer, landing
a speaking gig isn't that tough. In the beginning, it's best to start
small. Let me give you an example. A friend of mine left his big
firm years ago to start his own consulting business. He needed to
establish himself as an expert in the field of branding, and while
he was terrified of public speaking, he knew it would be the best
way to interact with potential customers and hone his message.
He started small, getting to know all the organizers of small, local,
industry-specific events. He would ask these people, in return for
his help, to give him a room during an off-hour at the end of the
event, so he could speak to a small gathering of people that he
would organize.
Initially, he wasn't even listed on the conference agenda. He'd
meet people throughout the conference and tell them that he was
organizing an intimate gathering of professionals interested in
talking about their branding issues. The informal atmosphere
allowed him to deliver his content without the pressure of a big
audience, while at the same time getting valuable feedback from
the people that attended. In short order, the rooms he spoke at
started getting bigger, his speeches became more refined, and the
audience went from intimate to intimidating—though, by then,
he had worked through most of his fears.
What if you are at a conference and you're not a speaker? There
are other places to distinguish yourself. Remember, you're not
there just to learn new things from other people—you're there to
meet others and have others meet and remember you.
When sessions open up for questions, try and be among the
first people to put your hand in the air. A really well-formed and
insightful question is a mini-opportunity to get seen by the entire
audience. Be sure to introduce yourself, tell people what company
you work for, what you do, and then ask a question that leaves the
audience buzzing. Ideally, the question should be related to your
expertise so you have something to say when someone comes up
and says, "That was an interesting question."
Guerrilla Warfare:
Organize a Conference Within a Conference
True commandos aren't restricted by the agenda that they
receive at registration. Who says you can't arrange your own din
ner while at the conference, or put together an informal discus
sion on a particular topic that matters to you?
The dinners at your average event are often a total mess.
People's attention is scattershot; everyone is trying to rise above
the noise and be polite and engaged with ten different strangers,
listen to a keynote address, and get a few mouthfuls of mediocre
food all at the same time. It doesn't make for a good setting for
conversation.
At times like these, I've been tempted to go back to my room,
order room service, and spend the rest of the night in front of my
laptop. That, however, would be a terrible lost opportunity.
The alternative is to commandeer the useless hour or two by
throwing a dinner of your own.
I like to do this at least once during most conferences. Before
the event, I'll scout out a nice nearby restaurant and send out pre-
invites to a private dinner that I'll host alongside the scheduled
affair. You can do this ad hoc during the day or you can send out
official invites beforehand. One way I've had big success is sending
a fax to the hotel (most conferences have one host hotel where
most VIPs will be staying) that the individuals get when they
arrive the night before the conference asking them to join a group
for dinner or drinks that night. Think about it: no secretaries to
screen the message. Likely those people have no plans when they
arrive, and even if they do, you will already stand out when you
ultimately meet them during the conference, and I assure you they
will be grateful for your having thought of them. If the keynote
address is being given by someone particularly interesting, I'll
turn my own affair into pre- or post-dinner drinks.
Often, creating your own forum is the best way to assure that
people you're looking to meet will be in the same place at the same
time. Ideally, you'd like to invite a stable of speakers to your din
ner, which will provide a star-studded draw to your little event.
Remember, even an unknown becomes a mini-star after their talk
at an event.
I do this each year at Renaissance Weekend, an annual New
Year's weekend gathering for politicians, businesspeople, and
other professionals. I send out a funny invite asking a few people
if they'd like to play hooky from an official dinner and go to a nice
restaurant elsewhere. At Renaissance Weekend, they even have a
night designed for going off on your own to do just this. This
works best at long three-day conferences. As with college, every
one likes to get off campus. If the conference is in your hometown,
be bold enough to invite people to your home for a real treat, as I
have always done with the Los Angeles-based Milken Global Con
ference. This conference is one of the best in the United States for
both content and guests. Each year I hold a dinner party at my
house the day before the event is set to begin. People generally
arrive in town a day early anyway, and a fun, intimate dinner party
is always preferable to eating hotel food alone.
Dinner is not the only way to organize a conference within a
conference. Long conferences are often filled with social out
ings—golf, tours, and visits to historic sites. Too often, such events
are just plain terrible. Have you ever gone to a museum in a crowd
of 400 people? You feel like a herded cow.
There's no reason why you can't take the lead in developing
your own personal tour or visit to an out-of-the-way place that
convention organizers might not have thought about. An old col
league from Starwood used to do this at winter conferences. An
avid skier, he'd research the best skiing in the area—usually some
out-of-the-way slopes that no one had taken the time to discover.
He'd have no problem attracting a few other skiers who were
jazzed about the prospect of some fresh powder.
The more active you become in playing "host" of your own
conference within a conference, the better you'll be at helping
other people make connections, making you a center of influence.
When you meet people at your dinner party or event, don't simply
introduce yourself; introduce the folks you meet to other people.
If your new acquaintances don't quickly take up the conversation,
offer a fact about one guest to another. "Sergio was in charge of
Coke's global branding efforts in their heyday. Aren't you looking
to refurbish your company's brand, David? You couldn't find a
better sounding board than Sergio."
Draft Off a Big Kahuna
If you get to know the most popular man or woman at the
conference—the one who knows everyone—you'll be able to
hang with them as they circle through the most important people
at the conference. Conference organizers, speakers, and name-
brand CEOs and professionals attending the event are all worthy
kahunas.
Check the convention program for the names of luminaries
and key figures. Make those the sessions you attend. Arrive early at
events where they'll be speaking. Stand near key entrances or reg
istration tables. Be ready to introduce yourself, or stay behind for
a quick chance to meet them.
You must remember to talk with speakers before they've hit the
stage. Often, that anonymous schlub slurping yogurt at the break
fast table will take on the aura of a celebrity after he's spoken on
stage. Find them before they've gained celebrity status, and you
have a better chance to connect. Or ask the conference organizer
(who has become your buddy anyway) to point them out if you
don't know what they look like.
Be an Information Hub
Once you've created an opportunity to meet new people,
establish yourself as an "information hub"—a key role of any
good networker. How? Go beyond just memorizing the confer
ence's brochure. Identify information the people around you
would like to know, and come prepared. This might include infor
mation about trade gossip, the best local restaurants, private par
ties, etc. Pass key information along, or let others know how they
can obtain it. This role does not end with the networking event, of
course. As an information resource, you're someone always worth
knowing.
Master the Deep Bump
The bump is the main weapon in your conference commando
arsenal. Reduced to its essence, it is the two minutes you're given
with someone you're "bumping into" whom you are looking to
meet. Your goal should be to leave the encounter with an invita
tion to reconnect at a later time.
The bump, like other practices, is nuanced. The perfect bump
is one that feels both fast and meaningful at the same time. I call
this ideal a "deep bump."
Deep bumps are an effort to quickly make contact, establish
enough of a connection to secure the next meeting, and move on.
You've just paid a boatload of money to be at this conference
(unless you're a speaker, when it's usually free!), and you want to
meet as many people as you can in the time that you have. You're
not looking to make a best friend. You are looking, however, to
make enough of a connection to secure a follow-up.
Creating a connection between any two people necessitates a
certain level of intimacy. In two minutes, you need to look deeply
into the other person's eyes and heart, listen intently, ask questions
that go beyond just business, and reveal a little about yourself in
a way that introduces some vulnerability (yes, vulnerability; it's
contagious!) into the interaction. All these things come together
to create a genuine connection.
Not possible, you exclaim. Ah, but I've seen it done and I do it.
The deep bump is not just theoretical mumbo jumbo.
There are some people who need just seconds, rather than min
utes, to pull off a deep bump. Former President Bill Clinton, for
instance, is the master. I've watched him up close as he works a line
of well-wishers and fans (and sometimes, strident opponents).
With each person, President Clinton will reach out to shake his or
her hand. Most of the time, he'll use two hands or clasp a person's
elbow to create instantaneous warmth. He'll make direct eye con-
tact and, in that fleeting moment, ask a personal question or two. I
don't know how many times I've heard different people from the
same event comment about how incredible it was to be the sole
focus of the man's attention. And that's even the Republicans.
The profoundness of that connection doesn't come from the
President's desire to impart his opinion or riff on policy. His goal
is at once very simple and powerful. The President wants you to
like him (so in his own now-famous words, he "feels" what you
feel). When he shows in those brief moments that he likes and
cares about you, the human response is to reciprocate. He is finely
tuned in to the radio station that we each listen to, WIIFM, also
known as What's In It for Me? I never once heard Clinton ask for
a vote or talk about himself when engaged in these quick, casual
encounters. His questions always revolved around what the other
person was thinking, what was troubling them.
Most people think a conference is a good time to market their
wares. They rush from room to room desperately trying to sell
themselves. But a commando knows that you have to get people to
like you first. The sales come later—in the follow-up discussions
you have after the conference. Now is the time to begin to build
trust and a relationship.
Know Your Targets
You're ready to bump. Now you just need someone to bump
against.
At each conference, I keep a list of three or four people I'd most
like to meet on a folded piece of paper in my jacket pocket. I check
off each person as I meet them. Beside their name, I'll jot down
what we talked about and make a note about how I'm going to
contact them later. And, once you've met with and engaged some
one, you find yourself chatting again and again throughout the
conference.
You can't, however, rely solely on chance to find them at cock
tails or on a break. I usually ask the conference organizer to point
to the area where they'll be and I watch where they sit. Most peo
ple continue to sit in the same seats throughout the conference.
For example, Barry Diller, the CEO of InterActiveCorp.,
was someone I'd wanted to meet for years. He's a visionary in
commerce and media, with an uncanny ability to foresee, before
anyone else, where innovation will turn into profit. He smells
money.
Researching one of my conferences, I noticed he was scheduled
to speak. I found out when and where and got access to the area
where he would have to get on and off the stage. I positioned
myself in a place where it would be damn near impossible to get
by without giving me a little nudge.
As he walked by, I got his attention. "Mr. Diller, my name
is Keith Ferrazzi. I work for Barry Sternleicht as his CMO at
Starwood. He's mentioned before that you and I should talk and
I thought I'd just make the introduction myself. I know you're
busy, but I'm wondering if I can call your office and arrange a
time to meet with you when we get back home?" [Pause—to
which he responded, "Sure, call my New York office."] "Great,
I wanted to talk to you about a number of ideas I have about
your business, but I've also admired your career and pioneer
ing work you've done for a long time." That was it. I played my
heaviest and hardest card, which was my boss, a fellow visionary
entrepreneur for whom Diller held respect. With a name as big as
Diller, sometimes the bump can't be as deep as you'd like. Still,
with limited time I managed to gain credibility by dropping a
familiar and trusted name, show a bit of vulnerability in admit
ting I admired his career, and suggested I had value to offer with
my ideas. That bump went on to realize a job offer and introduc
tions within his company that are now important clients for
FerrazziGreenlight.
Your sound-bite introduction will change depending on the
circumstances. Generally, it will be a two- or three-sentence
opener, tailored to the event, about what you can or want to do
for them.
Breaks Are No Time to Take a Break
Breaks are where the real work happens at a conference.
Make sure and stake out the right place. Have you ever noticed
how guests gather in the kitchen or some other central place when
you have gatherings at home? One warm and centrally located
spot is often the center of any party. The same holds true at a busi
ness gathering. Determine where most people will gather, or at
least pass, and station yourself there. This might be near the food
table, the bar, or the reception area.
Be on your game during these times. U.S. News & World Report
revealed Henry Kissinger's technique for commanding a room:
"Enter the room. Step to the right. Survey the room. See who is
there. You want other people to see you."
Kissinger knows that great networkers know how to make a
memorable first impression. They see a room of people as a play
ing field. Remember to look sharp. Don't underestimate the
importance of dressing well in places where you'll be noticed. And
start bumping.
Follow Up
If you didn't think I was a nut before, now it's a certainty.
I know I've told you to follow up already, but that's how vitally
important I think it is. So here it is again: follow up. After that,
follow up again. Then, after you've done that, follow up once more.
I don't like to put it off or it might not get done. How many of
you have cards from events that occurred months ago or even
longer? That's a lost opportunity. During speeches, I'll sit in the
back and write follow-up e-mails to the people I just met at the
previous break. Everyone you talked with at the conference needs
to get an e-mail reminding them of their commitment to talk
again. I also like sending a note to the speakers, even if I didn't get
a chance to meet them.
Here's an actual example of one of my follow-up e-mails:
Hey Carla,
Wow, what a fun time. I didn't expect tequila shots to he a part
of the Forbes CIO conference. We definitely have to make this an
annual occurrence. Hey, I also wanted to follow up with our dis
cussion on your marketing strategy and your interest in the Fer-
razziGreenlight loyalty strategy work we've done as a way to help
reach your adult women demographic. When can you do a call
this week, or at your leisure?
Also, I wanted to say that I heard no fewer than three separate
people talk about your session and what a great speaker you were.
Congrats!
Best,
Keith
It's the People, Not the Speakers
You've probably already figured this rule out by now. I don't
often find the content of conferences particularly useful. I read a
lot. I think about these subjects constantly and talk to a lot of peo
ple. By the time I get to a conference, I know the substance of
what's going to be said.
Of course, there are exceptions, like when Michael Hammer
talked about reengineering and then would magically turn the
talk into both a lesson in life and a stand-up comedy routine.
Epiphanies aside, most conference speeches are about one more
IBM or Microsoft senior VP talking about his or her process-
improvement project. Even when the speaker is interesting, the
mentality is the same: It's always about the people.
Don't Be This Person
THE WALLFLOWER: The limp handshake, the position in the far cor
ner of the room, the unassuming demeanor—all signs that this per
son thinks he or she is there to watch the speakers.
THE ANKLE HUGGER: The ankle hugger is a total codependent and
thinks that the first person they meet is their BFF (best friend forever).
Out of fear, they shadow their BFF the entire conference. You've
spent too much money not to leverage the opportunity to meet many
different people. So bump! You have a lifetime to build relationships
with these people. Collect as many follow-ups as you can.
THE CELEBRITY HOUND: This type of person funnels every bit
of their energy into trying to meet the most important person at
the event. The problem is, if the person they want to meet truly is the
most important person at the conference, that person will be on
their guard. And maybe even guarded, literally. A young friend of
mine went to see the King of Jordan speak recently and came back
ecstatic. He had waited an hour or more, along with 500 other
people, for a chance to shake the King's hand. I asked him, "How,
exactly, did you benefit from that encounter?"
"I can say I met him," he sheepishly replied. I told him that there
were probably at least a handful of dignitaries and members of the
King's cabinet in that room whom no one knew or wanted to know.
Wouldn't it have been better for my young friend to actually have
had a conversation with one of them, instead of a handshake with
someone who will not remember him beyond the handshake?
Maybe he could have struck up a relationship. Instead, he got a
photo and a handshake.
THE SMARMY EYE DARTER: Nothing will give you a bad rap in
less time. Be Bill Clinton instead. If you spend only thirty seconds
with someone, make it thirty seconds of warmth and sincerity. Noth
ing will give you a good rap in less time.
THE CARD DISPENSER/AMASSER: This guy passes his card out
like it had the cure for cancer written on its back. Frankly, cards
are overrated. If you perform the bump successfully, and extract a
promise for a future meeting, a piece of paper is irrelevant. This
person gloats over the number of "contacts" he's made. In reality,
he's created nothing more valuable than a phone book with peo
ple's names and numbers to cold-call.