CHAPTER 30
Balance Is B.S.
Balance is a myth.
You can't call my schedule "balanced" by conventional
standards. Let's take a look at a typical day. Monday: I was up at
4 A.M. in Los Angeles to make calls to my team in New York.
Then I worked the phone for a few more hours, trying to organ
ize a fundraiser for a candidate friend of mine. By 7 A.M., I was
at the airport for a flight to Portland, Oregon, to meet a new
customer (with two cell phones buzzing, fidgeting with my
BlackBerry, sending short e-mails, and my laptop never far away
with spreadsheet access). After the meeting, I'm back in the car
on my way to Seattle and back on the phone, setting up meetings
for tonight, tomorrow, and a week from now. I'm in constant
contact with my assistant, trying to get invitations out for a big
dinner party I'm throwing in a month. In Seattle, I have a sched
uled dinner with the folks organizing Bill Gates's CEO conference
this year, after which I'll have drinks with some close friends.
And tomorrow, there will be another 4 A.M. wake-up call to do it
all again.
Welcome to what my friends jokingly refer to as "Ferrazzi
Time," a zone of operations in which the switchboards are always
open and the rush of humanity is ongoing.
Witnessing such a schedule begs a number of very important
questions: Is this a life? Operating in such a way, can one have bal
ance between work and having a life? And do you—God forbid—
have to operate in Ferrazzi Time to be successful?
The answers are: Yes, it is a life, albeit my own; yes, you can find
balance, albeit your own; and no, thank heavens, you don't have to
do it my way.
For me, the best thing about a relationship-driven career is that
it isn't a career at all. It's a way of living. Several years ago, I started
to realize that connecting was actually a way of seeing the world.
When I thought and behaved in that way, dividing my life between
professional and personal spheres no longer made sense. I realized
that what made you successful in both worlds were other people
and the way you related to them. Whether those people were fam
ily people, work people, or friend people, real connecting insists
that you bring the same values to every relationship. As a result, I
no longer needed to make a distinction between my career happi
ness and my life happiness—they were both pieces of me. My life.
When it became clear to me that the key to my life was the rela
tionships in it, I found there was no longer a need to compart
mentalize work from, say, family or friends. I could spend my
birthday at a business conference and be surrounded with warm
and wonderful friends, as I recently did, or I could be at home in
Los Angeles or New York with equally close friends to celebrate.
The kind of false idea of balance as some sort of an equation, that
you could take this many hours from one side of your life and give
it to this other side, flew out the window. And with it went all the
stress of trying to achieve that perfect state of equilibrium we read
and hear so much about.
Balance can't be bought or sold. It doesn't need to be "imple
mented." Balance is a mind-set, as individual and unique as our
genetic code. Where you find joy, you find balance. My wacky
schedule works for me and perhaps only for me. The blurring of
professional and personal lives isn't for everyone. The important
thing is to see connecting with others not just as another manipu
lative tool used toward achieving a goal but rather as a way of life.
When you're out of balance, you'll know because you'll be rushed,
angry, and unfulfilled. When you're balanced, you'll be joyful,
enthusiastic, and full of gratitude.
Don't worry about trying to develop your own version of
Ferrazzi Time. The way you reach out to others is the way you eat
an 800-pound elephant: one small bite at a time.
In the end, we all live one life. And that life is all about the
people we live it with.
More People, More Balance
If you buy into the myth of balance (the one that sees life as an
equation), as I once did, the answers to such questions as "If I'm so
'accomplished,' why aren't I having more fun?" or "If I'm so 'organ
ized,' why do I feel so out of control?" is to "simplify," "compartmen
talize," or "reduce" your life into its most essential components.
So we try to save time by eating our lunches at our desk. We
have less serendipitous conversations with colleagues, strangers,
and other "nonessentials" at the water cooler. We consolidate our
schedules to include only the most important actions.
People tell us, "If you just get more organized, if you strike a
balance between work and home, and limit yourself to the impor
tant people in your life, you'll feel better." That's just totally mis
guided. What they should be saying is "I gotta get a life filled with
people I love." The problem, as I see it, isn't what you're working
on, it's whom you're working with.
You can't feel in love with your life if you hate your work; and,
more times than not, people don't love their work because they
work with people they don't like. Connecting with others doubles
and triples your opportunities to meet with people that can lead
to a new and exciting job.
I think the problem in today's world isn't that we have too
many people in our lives, it's that we don't have enough. Dr. Will
Miller and Glenn Sparks, in their book Refrigerator Rights: Creat
ing Connections and Restoring Relationships, argue that with our
increased mobility, American emphasis on individualism, and the
overwhelming media distractions available to us, we lead lives of
relative isolation.
How many people can walk into our homes and just open up the
fridge and help themselves? Not many. People need "refrigerator
rights relationships," the kind that are comfortable, informal, and
intimate enough to let us walk into one another's kitchens and rum
mage through the refrigerator without asking. It is close relation
ships like these that keep us well-adjusted, happy, and successful.
America's focus on individualism works against reaching out
to others. Comparative studies on levels of job stress and worker
dissatisfaction show that people of individualistic cultures typi
cally report much higher stress levels than do the people who
work in more community-oriented cultures. In spite of our high
standard of living, wealth and privilege haven't produced emo
tional well-being. Instead, as these studies show, it's a sense of
belonging that brings us happiness.
When our lonely lives catch up with us, we turn to self-help lit
erature for answers, but it isn't SELF-help we need, I'd argue, it's
help from others. If you buy this, and I hope that you do, then
what I teach in this book is the perfect antidote to all this talk of
imbalance. Connecting is that rare thing that lets us have our cake
and eat it, too. We end up serving the interests of both our work
and our life, ourselves and others.
Oscar Wilde once suggested that if a person did what he or she
loved, it would feel as if they never worked a day in their life. If
your life is filled with people you care about and who care for you,
why concern yourself with "balancing" anything at all?