CHAPTER 8
Take Names
Once you've taken the time to figure out what your mission is
and where you want to get to, the next step is to identify the
people who can help you get there.
The successful organization and management of the informa
tion that makes connecting flourish is vital. Tracking the people you
know, the people you want to know, and doing all the homework
that will help you develop intimate relationships with others can
cause one heck of an information overload. How do you manage it?
Luckily, today we have a whole new set of software and hardware
tools that can help us deal with the task in an orderly fashion.
But you don't need the latest and greatest gadgets. Ink and
paper are a perfectly suitable way to keep track of the new people
in your expanding social life. I'm a list-taking madman, and you
should become one, too.
My experience at YaYa is a good example of how lists help
people achieve their goals. On my last day at Starwood, I made
more than forty phone calls. One of them was to Sandy Climan.
What's interesting about the call, and the dozens of others like it I
made that day, is that long before any of these people knew me,
many of them had been on one of many lists I'd been keeping for
years.
It was Sandy who eventually recruited me to YaYa. It didn't
hurt that one of the other investors with a stake in the company,
Knowledge Universe, was backed by the famed financier Michael
Milken, who ultimately became a mentor of mine whom I'd met
through a mutual nonprofit interest.
In November 2000, the YaYa board named me CEO and
handed me two goals: establish a viable business model, and either
find a major investor or sell the company to a well-heeled strate
gic acquirer. At the time, YaYa had the technology to invent online
games that corporations could use to attract and educate their
customers, but the company had no customers—or revenue.
First, I sat down and established a ninety-day, one-year, and
three-year mission in my Networking Action Plan. Each goal
required me to connect with and develop different parts of my
network.
In ninety days, I had to establish credibility with the board,
gain the trust of my employees, and set a clear direction for the
business.
In a year, I wanted to have enough blue-chip accounts to be
close to profitability and moving toward making the company
attractive for potential acquisition. Most important, I had to
prove to the outside world that YaYa was producing something
worthwhile. The concept of advergaming, which wasn't even a
word then, was not considered a viable segment of the advertising
market. Interactive ads were hopelessly ineffective, and banner ads
on Web sites were now considered an industry joke. We had to dif
ferentiate ourselves.
I wanted a business model in place three years down the road
that could function without me, gain liquidity for my investors,
and solidify the company's standing as a thought leader in the
online marketing arena.
To make these goals possible, I mapped out the most impor
tant players in both the online and games industries, from CEOs
and journalists to programmers and academics. My goal was to
get to know almost all of them within a year.
To create excitement around our product, I wrote down a list
of people I called "influentials": the early adopters, journalists,
and industry analysts that help spread the initial buzz about a
product or service. Next, I made a list of potential customers,
potential acquirers, and people who might be interested in fund
ing us down the road. (In creating your own categories, each
should correspond to your own goals.)
When you make such lists, it's important you name the actual
decision makers, and not just an organization. The point here is to
have a readily accessible and specific list of names.
At the outset, concentrate on the people who are already part
of your existing network. I bet you have no idea how vast and
widespread it really is. As I noted in the previous chapter, take the
time to list people such as:
Relatives
Friends of relatives
All your spouse's relatives and contacts
Current colleagues
Members of professional and social organizations
Current and former customers and clients
Parents of your children's friends
Neighbors, past and present
People you went to school with
People you have worked with in the past
People in your religious congregation
Former teachers and employers
People you socialize with
People who provide services to you
Next, I enter the gathered names into a database. (I tend to use
Microsoft's Outlook, but there are plenty of programs out there
that are just as good.) I then create call sheets by region, listing the
people I know and those I'd like to know. When I'm in a given
town, I'll try to phone as many people as I can. I have the numbers
in my Palm and BlackBerry; both devices have unique and impor
tant functionality to me, so I've kept both.
I also print out and carry these lists around with me wherever
I go. They focus my efforts in cabs between meetings. I have some
thing palpable to encourage me to reach out. Some of the lists you
create will be related to your action plans; others are more general,
helping you to stay connected. The way you organize your lists can
be fluid. I have lists by geographical location, by industry, by activ
ity (other runners, for instance, or people who like to go out on
the town), whether they're an acquaintance or friend, and so on.
Adding to the names on your lists is simply a matter of looking
in the right place. In the beginning stages at YaYa, I read all the
trade magazines having to do with advertising and games. If I read
about someone who fell into one of my categories, I'd put him on
a list and find out his contact information.
When you're looking for people to reach out to, you'll find
them everywhere. One great resource for making lists is—it
almost sounds absurd—other people's lists. Newspapers and
magazines do rankings of this sort all the time.
Long before I became one of CrairCs "40 Under 40," for exam
ple, I had been ripping out that list for years. I clip out lists of top
CEOs, most admired marketers, the nation's most progressive
entrepreneurs—all of these kinds of lists are published in local
and national publications; every industry has something similar.
You want not only to know who the players in your field are
but eventually to be recognized as one of those players. The peo
ple who are on Crain's "40 Under 40" aren't necessarily the forty
best businesspeople. They are, however, probably the forty most
connected. And they probably all have lunched with one another
at one time or another. When you get to know these people, and
the people they know (including the journalists at Crain's respon
sible for the "40 Under 40"), you're that much more likely to be on
the list yourself the next time it appears.
There's another category you might want to add, something I
call my "aspirational contacts." There are those extremely high-
level people who have nothing to do with my business at hand but
are just, well, interesting or successful or both. The people on that
list maybe anyone from heads of state and media moguls, to artists
and actors, to people others speak highly of. I list these people, too.
If you could see my Palm, I could show you the contact infor
mation for Richard Branson, chairman of the Virgin empire. Now,
I don't know Richard Branson ... yet. But I want to. If you scroll
down a bit farther, you'll find Howard Stringer, CEO of Sony
Corp. of America. He was on my aspirational list once. I now
know Howard.
People get a chuckle out of this, but the results speak for
themselves.
Remember, if you're organized, focused, and a stickler for taking
names, there's no one that's out of reach.
As for me, my three years at YaYa came to a close. In 2002,
Forbes magazine reported on our extraordinary rise to success as a
start-up that had come from nowhere with a totally new concept.
The concept of advergaming gained a cultural currency in the
marketplace, and the term is now used by CEOs and journalists
alike. The other day I overheard a CEO, who didn't know we
had created the word, bragging about the innovative tool called
"advergaming" that had led to a measurable increase in the sales
and recognition of his product. As planned, YaYa was ultimately
sold to a public company, giving investors access to the liquid cur
rency they were looking for and giving YaYa the operating capital
it needed. And it's clear that without that bunch of lists to thank,
YaYa would never have made it beyond the first year of operations.