16 Technology Is a Wonderful Servant
Technology is just a tool.
MELINDA GATES
You must discipline yourself to treat technology as a servant, not as a master.
The purpose of technology is to make your life smoother and easier, not to create
complexity, confusion, and stress.
Usually, to get more done of higher value, you have to stop doing things of
lower value. Keep asking yourself, “What’s important here?” What is most
important for you to accomplish at work? What is important in your personal
life? If you could do only one or two of the activities available to you, which
ones would they be?
Use your technological tools to regularly remind yourself of what is most
important and protect yourself from what is least important. Technology can be a
simple way to get control of your communications, your time, and even your
emotions.
Take Control of Your Communication
Clear your digital workspace as you would your physical desk; close every
program not needed for the task at hand. Block the websites that distract you the
most. Make sure that only the communication channels you need to complete
your task are open. Most tasks require some communication, but having ten
different ways to communicate is overkill. Once only relevant information is
visible on your screen, arrange your windows for perfect workflow.
Show your smartphone who’s boss by disabling all notifications—both audio
and visual. This is an important step toward checking your phone on your own
schedule and thus regaining control of your life.
But What about Emergencies?
But What about Emergencies?
Workers with responsibility for young children, elderly parents, or disabled
relatives may feel that unplugging from technology or disabling notifications is
simply not an option. What if their elderly parent slips in the bath or their young
child has an emergency at day care?
This is an absolutely valid concern. The solution, however, is not to be
available to everyone at all times. Rather, create a phone number, e-mail address,
or other communication channel that only the caretaker of your loved one knows
about. Leave that channel open, and reserve it for emergencies.
If you desire, you can do this for your work life as well. Give your boss or
key clients a way to reach you that no one else has. You could also program your
e-mail manager to automatically sort e-mails from your most important work
relationships into a “Read First” folder.
In other words, segment your communication channels so that only frogs can
hop into your castle of concentration.
Take Control of Your Time
Your calendar makes a wonderful servant but a terrible master. Never
automatically click Accept on a digital invitation. Ask yourself if the invitation
really fits your priorities before pressing the button.
Schedule large blocks of time for task completion into your calendar, as if
they were appointments. Be so aggressive about it that when people look at your
calendar, they will see only a tiny slice of free time. This will impress them and
motivate them to schedule shorter meetings.
Your digital to-do list (otherwise known as “task management software”) is a
powerful tool for taking control of your time. It has all the positives of a paper
to-do list plus a few additional features.
Digital to-do lists allow you to transfer items to another person’s to-do list at
the click of a button. This can help you delegate more efficiently—but make sure
you accept only those tasks that are in line with your priorities. A digital to-do
list can also be programmed to remind you relentlessly about your most
important tasks.
Take Control of Your Emotions Using Technology
Many people fail to make technology their servant because they fear learning
new skills. This fear can be mastered: refuse to let it hold you back. Everything
is learnable, and what others have learned, you can learn as well.
Let your organization know that you are interested in learning about
technological tools that will make you more efficient. If you have a friend,
family member, or coworker who is a tech whiz, learn everything you can from
that person.
Above all else, avoid the phrase “I can’t.” Technology is no longer optional;
it is just as important as reading, writing, and arithmetic. And the idea that only
certain kinds of people are good at technology is a myth. No matter your age,
race, or gender, you have the power to master technology. If you do become
frustrated, just remember that it happens to everyone; even expert programmers
who are paid hundreds of dollars an hour will sometimes be frustrated by
technology.
When you make technology your servant, it can be a source of positive,
motivating emotions and increased productivity. Post your most important
stretch goal on social media and promise your followers you will achieve that
goal. Update them daily on your progress so that if you skip a day or slack off,
everyone will know.
Posting on social media about your progress is a great way to reward yourself
for making headway on long-term projects. When the payoff is far in the future,
it can be hard to stay motivated, so getting likes or hearts from your followers on
your daily updates can be a way to achieve a minipayoff.
You can even seek out people in your field on social media and compete with
them to see who can eat the most frogs. For example, many novelists like to
share their daily word counts on Twitter so they can see who in their social circle
is the fastest and most productive writer—and who gives in to procrastination.
Stop being enslaved by social media, and make it work for you instead. It’s
simple: instead of posting something trite, post about your life goals and seek the
social support to conquer them.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Resolve today to turn off all notifications, except for your emergency
channels. Create special areas in your digital life for your most important
tasks.
2. Resolve to research and install one piece of software or one app that will
help you be more efficient and focused.