CHAPTER 17
The Art of Small Talk
We all have what it takes to charm everyone around us—
colleagues, strangers, friends, the boss. But having it and
knowing how to work it is the difference between going through
life in the shadows and commanding center stage wherever you
happen to be.
So you weren't born with that essential ingredient of charm,
the gift of gab. So what? Few are.
We've all struggled with that ancient fear of walking into a
room full of complete strangers and having nothing to say. Instead
of looking out at a sea of potential new friends and associates, we
see terrifying obstacles to the wet bar. It happens at business meet
ings, conferences, PTA meetings, and in just about every forum
where being social matters. That's why small talk is so important.
That's also why, for those of us without a knack for small talk, sit
uations such as these that can help us meet so many others are also
the situations that make us feel the most naked and uneasy.
And in this area, technology hasn't helped one bit. Wallflowers
see e-mail and instant messaging as a nifty escape hatch from hav
ing to interact with others. The truth is, however, that these new
modes of communication aren't particularly good for creating
new relationships. The digital medium is all about speed and
brevity. It may make communication efficient, but it's not effec
tive when it comes to making friends.
Yet some are able to negotiate social situations with relative
ease. How do they do it?
The answer, most people assume, is that the ability to make
successful small talk is somehow innate, is something you're born
with. While comforting, this assumption is entirely untrue. Con
versation is an acquired skill. If you have the determination and
the proper information, just like any other skill, it can be learned.
The problem is that so much of the information out there is
flat-out wrong. I know too many CEOs who take pride in their
terse, bottom-line behavior. They proudly assert their disinterest
in "playing the game"; they revel in their inability to be anything
but gruff.
But the fact is that small talk—the kind that happens between
two people who don't know each other—is the most important
talk we do. Language is the most direct and effective method for
communicating our objectives. When playwrights and screen
writers develop characters for their work, the first thing they
establish is motivation. What does the character want? What is he
or she after? What are his or her desires? The answers dictate what
that character will and won't say in dialogue. That exercise is not
particular to the dramatic world; it's a reflection of how we
humans are hardwired. We use words not only to articulate and
make concrete our own deepest desires, but also to enlist others in
quenching those desires.
About ten years ago, Thomas Harrell, a professor of applied
psychology at Stanford University Graduate School of Business,
set out to identify the traits of its most successful alumni. Study
ing a group of MBAs a decade after their graduation, he found
that grade-point average had no bearing on success. The one trait
that was common among the class's most accomplished graduates
was "verbal fluency." Those that had built businesses and climbed
the corporate ladder with amazing speed were those who could
confidently make conversation with anyone in any situation.
Investors, customers, and bosses posed no more of a threat than
colleagues, secretaries, and friends. In front of an audience, at a
dinner, or in a cab, these people knew how to talk.
As Harrell's study confirmed, the more successfully you use
language, the faster you can get ahead in life.
So what should your objective be in making small talk? Good
question. The goal is simple: Start a conversation, keep it going,
create a bond, and leave with the other person thinking, "I dig that
person," or whatever other generational variation of that phrase
you want to use.
A lot has been said about how one should go about doing that.
But in my opinion, the experts have gotten wrong the one thing
that works the best. The first thing small-talk experts tend to do is
place rules around what can and can't be said. They claim that
when you first meet a person, you should avoid unpleasant, overly
personal, and highly controversial issues.
Wrong! Don't listen to these people! Nothing has contributed
more to the development of boring chitchatters everywhere. The
notion that everyone can be everything to everybody at all times is
completely off the mark. Personally, I'd rather be interested in
what someone was saying, even if I disagreed, than be catatonic
any day.
When it comes to making an impression, differentiation is the
name of the game. Confound expectation. Shake it up. How?
There's one guaranteed way to stand out in the professional world:
Be yourself. I believe that vulnerability—yes, vulnerability—is one
of the most underappreciated assets in business today.
Too many people confuse secrecy with importance. Business
schools teach us to keep everything close to our vest. But the
world has changed. Power, today, comes from sharing informa
tion, not withholding it. More than ever, the lines demarcating the
personal and the professional have blurred. We're an open-source
society, and that calls for open-source behavior. And as a rule, not
many secrets are worth the energy required to keep them secret.
Being up front with people confers respect; it pays them the
compliment of candor. The issues we all care most about are the
issues we all want to talk about most. Of course, this isn't a call to
be confrontational or disrespectful. It's a call to be honest, open,
and vulnerable enough to genuinely allow other people into your
life so that they can be vulnerable in return.
How many negotiations would have ended better if both par
ties involved were simply honest and forthright about their needs?
Even when there is disagreement, I've found people will respect
you more for putting your cards on the table.
Whether at the negotiating table or at the dinner table, our
penchant for inhibition creates a psychological barrier that sepa
rates us from those we'd like to know better. When we leave a for
mal, hesitant, and uncomfortable conversation where we've held
back our true selves, we console ourselves by dismissing the
encounter, or more often the person, by thinking, "We had noth
ing in common anyway."
But the truth is everyone has something in common with
every other person. And you won't find those similarities if you
don't open up and expose your interests and concerns, allowing
others to do likewise.
This has some comforting implications.
Once you know heartfelt candor is more effective than canned
quips in starting a meaningful conversation, the idea of "breaking
the ice" becomes easy. Too many of us believe "breaking the ice"
means coming up with a brilliant, witty, or extravagantly insight
ful remark. But few among us are Jay Leno or David Letterman.
When you realize the best icebreaker is a few words from the
heart, the act of starting a conversation becomes far less daunting.
Again and again I'm surprised by the power of the vulnerabil
ity principle in the art of making small talk. Recently I attended a
Conference Board meeting, an annual gathering for executives in
marketing and communications. As is the custom, participants
gather for a dinner the night before the event.
That night, sitting around the table were the heads of market
ing for companies like Wal-Mart, Cigna, Lockheed, Eli Lilly, eBay,
and Nissan. All of them were people who managed significant
marketing budgets. Their importance to my business is signifi
cant. This was an occasion that called for my being at my best.
Problem was, I left my best somewhere over Pittsburgh on the
flight there. The soundtrack of my life that night was the "Blues."
Hours before, I had received the final and definitive e-mail that
confirmed my worst fears: I was single again. I had just experi
enced the end of a traumatic and emotionally draining breakup. I
was in no mood to talk.
Sherry, the woman I was sitting beside, whom I had just met,
had no idea I wasn't being myself. As the conversation raged on at
the dinner table, I realized I was doing all the things I tell people
never to do. I was hiding behind polite, inconsequential questions
about nothing in particular.
Here we were, Sherry and I, looking at each other and talking,
but really saying nothing. It was clear we both couldn't wait for
the check.
At some point, I recognized how absurd I was behaving. I've
always told people I believe that every conversation you have is an
invitation to risk revealing the real you. What's the worst that can
happen? They don't respond in kind. So what. They probably
weren't worth knowing in the first place. But if the risk pays off,
well, now you've just turned a potentially dull exchange into
something interesting or even perhaps personally insightful—and
more times than not, a real relationship is formed.
It was at that point that I just came out and said what I was
feeling. "You know, Sherry, I've got to apologize. We don't know
each other very well, but I tend to be a whole lot more fun than
I'm being this evening. It's been a tough day. I just had a board
meeting where my board members put me through the wringer.
More important, I just suffered a pretty difficult breakup and it's
still got me down." Just like that, the rabbit was out of the hat. A
risky opening, a flash of vulnerability, a moment of truth, and the
dynamics of our conversation changed instantly.
Sure, she could have felt uncomfortable with such a personal
admission. Instead, it put her at ease. "Oh my, that's no problem.
Trust me, I understand. Everybody goes through it. Let me tell you
about my divorce."
We became engaged in ways we hadn't expected. Sherry's
shoulders relaxed. Her face loosened. She opened up. I felt drawn
into the conversation for the first time that night. She went on to
tell me about her painful divorce and all the things she had gone
through in the months after it. All of a sudden, the discussion
went into the emotional ramifications of breakups and how chal
lenging they can be. For both of us, it turned out to be a cathartic
moment. More than that, Sherry gave me some wonderful advice.
What happened next surprised even me. Upon hearing our
conversation, several normally buttoned-up members of the group
stopped their conversation and were drawn to ours. The entire
table bonded over the very common trials and tribulations of mar
riage and relationships: men, women, gay, straight, it didn't matter.
People who had been pensive and withdrawn were suddenly giving
personal testimonies while the rest of us joined in supportive sto
ries of our own. By evening's end, we were laughing and talking
intimately; it turned into one incredible dinner. Today, I really look
forward to seeing my friends at this quarterly event. They are
important people to me—yes, some of them have become cus
tomers, but more of them are real friends I feel I can count on.
The message here is that we can go through life, particularly
conferences and other professional gatherings, making shallow,
run-of-the-mill conversation with strangers that remain strangers.
Or we can put a little of ourselves, our real selves, on the line, give
people a glimpse of our humanity, and create the opportunity for
a deeper connection. We have a choice.
These days, I rarely blanch at the chance to introduce topics of
conversation that some consider off-limits. Spirituality, romance,
politics—these are some of the issues that make life worth living.
Of course, there are always fail-safe conversation starters suit
able for every business function: How did you get started in your
business? What do you enjoy most about your profession? Tell me
about some of the challenges of your job? But safety—whether in
conversation, business, or life—generally produces "safe" (read:
boring) results.
The real winners—those with astounding careers, warm rela
tionships, and unstoppable charisma—are those people who put
it all out there and don't waste a bunch of time and energy trying
to be something (or someone) they're not. Charm is simply a mat
ter of being yourself. Your uniqueness is your power. We are all
born with innate winning traits to be a masterful small talker.
The best way to become good at small talk is not to talk small
at all. That's the art; here is some of the science:
Learn the Power of Nonverbal Cues
You're at a meeting when you turn to the person standing next
to you. She turns to face you, and within a fraction of a second
your mind makes a thousand computations. In that instant, you're
trying to figure out whether you should run, fight, or be friendly.
What you're doing, anthropologists say, is thinking like a caveman.
Deep in our genetic code, we are conditioned to be afraid of
strangers. Will they eat us or feed us? That's why we form first
impressions so quickly; we have to decide whether or not it is safe
to approach.
You have about ten seconds before a person decides, subcon
sciously, whether they like you or not. In that short period of time
we don't exchange a lot of words; our judgment is mostly based on
nonverbal communication.
How do you get someone who doesn't know you to feel com
fortable talking?
This is not the time to play hard-to-get, keep a distance, or play
mysterious. These all-too-common reactions may work for the
likes of Marlon Brando, but for the rest us, such poses register as
"keep away!" in our prehistoric minds. Instead, we should take the
initiative in creating the impression we want to give. People are
wowed by social decisiveness when it's offered with compassion
and warmth. How another person perceives you is determined by
a number of things you do before you utter your first word.
• First, give the person a hearty smile. It says, "I'm approachable."
• Maintain a good balance of eye contact. If you maintain an
unblinking stare 100 percent of the time, that qualifies as leer
ing. That's plain scary. If you keep eye contact less than 70 per
cent of the time, you'll seem disinterested and rude. Somewhere
in between is the balance you're looking for.
• Unfold your arms and relax. Crossing your arms can make
you appear defensive or closed. It also signals tension. Relax!
People will pick up on your body language and react
accordingly.
• Nod your head and lean in, but without invading the other
person's space. You just want to show that you're engaged and
interested.
• Learn to touch people. Touching is a powerful act. Most people
convey their friendly intentions by shaking hands; some go
further by shaking with two hands. My favorite way to break
through the distance between me and the person I'm trying to
establish a bond with is to touch the other person's elbow. It
conveys just the right amount of intimacy, and as such, is a
favorite of politicians. It's not too close to the chest, which we
protect, but it's slightly more personal than a hand.
Be Sincere
Whether you spend five seconds or five hours with a new con
tact or acquaintance, make the time count. In Los Angeles, where
I live, eye darters are a party staple. They're constantly looking to
and fro in an attempt to ferret out the most important person in
the room. Frankly, it's a disgusting habit, and one that's sure to put
off those around you.
The surest way to become special in others' eyes is to make
them feel special. The correlate, of course, is equally true: Make
people feel insignificant and your significance to them shall cer
tainly diminish.
Develop Conversational Currency
When meeting someone new, be prepared to have something
to say. Keep up with current events. Cultivate some niche interest.
A single narrow specialty (cooking, golf, stamps) for which you
have passion will have surprising expansive powers.
After business school, I indulged my passion for food and took
a few months off taking courses at Le Cordon Bleu Culinary
School in London. Back then, I thought it was a frivolous expen
diture of my time. But my knowledge and passion for cooking
that came from that experience has come into playtime and again
in casual conversations. Even people who aren't that interested in
food enjoy hearing my funny and sometimes embarrassing stories
about learning my way around a French kitchen in London. What
you talk about is ultimately less important than how. It's edifying
and interesting to hear someone talk about something they have a
great interest in. Which means you can also talk about other peo
ple's passions. My COO, James Clark, for example, climbed Mt.
Everest while performing his duties virtually for all but the week
he was summiting. The astounding stories he has told me about
the experience are now excellent conversation fodder.
Just remember not to monopolize the conversation or go into
long-winded stories. Share your passion, but don't preach it.
Adjust Your Johari Window
The Johari Window is a model, invented by two American psy
chologists, that provides insight into how much people reveal of
themselves. Some people are introverted, revealing little; they keep
their window relatively closed. Other people are extroverted,
revealing a great deal and keeping their windows open. These
tendencies also fluctuate in different environments. In new and
strange situations, with people we are unfamiliar with, our win
dow remains small; we reveal little and expect others to do the
same. If, on the other hand, the climate is safe and trusting with
others that are similar to us, we share more of ourselves. Our win
dows open wider.
Successful communication depends, according to the model,
on the degree to which we can align ourselves and our windows to
match those we interact with.
Greg Seal, one of my earliest mentors who recruited me to
Deloitte, brought this idea to my attention, and I'm forever grate
ful. As a brash, outspoken young guy, my window was wide open.
Whether I was trying to sell consulting services to a shy CEO of an
engineering company or working with that company's rowdy sales
staff, my brash, outspoken style remained constant. Back then it
wasn't clear to me why, for instance, the sales staff came out of
meeting with me jazzed and the CEO couldn't wait for me to leave
his office. When Greg introduced the idea of the Johari Window,
and the need to adjust how open or closed that window was
depending on with whom you were speaking, it made perfect
sense. Greg remained true to himself no matter whom he spoke
with, but he delivered his message in a tone and style that fit that
person best.
Every person's Johari Window can be more or less open
depending on the circumstances. And different professions—
from those that demand a lot of interpersonal skills, like sales, to
those that, like engineering, are essentially solitary—attract peo
ple whose windows share similar tendencies. A computer pro
grammer's window, for example, generally never opens wide
unless he or she is around peers. A strong marketing person's win
dow, on the other hand, tends to be open regardless of the envi
ronment.
The key is knowing that in conducting small talk, we should be
aware of the different styles at play and adapt to the person we're
talking with. I know I can be gregarious and fun and outspoken
when meeting with the FerrazziGreenlight Training & Develop
ment staff. In a meeting with my loyalty-management strategy
consultants, who are much more analytical, I ratchet down the
excitement and focus on being more deliberate and precise. If we
address someone with the wrong style, the window may close shut
with nothing revealed. No connection is made.
Throughout my day, I come into contact with hundreds of dif
ferent people, each with their own distinct communication style.
The concept of the Johari Window has helped me become con
scious of my need to adapt my conversational approach to each
person I want to connect with.
One helpful technique I use is to try and envision myself as a
mirror to the person with whom I'm speaking. What's the cadence
of their speech? How loudly do they talk? What's their body lan
guage? By adjusting your behavior to mirror the person you are
talking to, he'll automatically feel more comfortable. This doesn't
mean, of course, that you should be disingenuous. Rather, it
shows that you're particularly sensitive to other people's emo
tional temperaments. You're just tweaking your style to ensure
that the windows remain wide open.
Make a Graceful Exit
How do you conclude a conversation? During meetings and
social gatherings, I'm often quite blunt. I'll mention something
meaningful that was said in the course of our conversation and
say, "There are so many wonderful people here tonight; I'd feel
remiss if I didn't at least try and get to know a few more of them.
Would you excuse me for a second?" People generally understand,
and appreciate the honesty. There's also always the drink option.
I'll say: "I'm going to get another drink. Would you like one?" If
they say no, I don't have an obligation to come back. If they say
yes, I'll be sure to enter into another conversation on my way to
the bar. When I return with a drink, I'll say, "I just ran into some
people you should meet. Come on over."
Until We Meet Again
In order to establish a lasting connection, small talk needs
to end on an invitation to continue the relationship. Be comple
mentary and establish a verbal agreement to meet again, even
if it's not business. "You really seem to know your wines. I've
enjoyed tapping your wisdom; we should get together sometime
to talk about wine. We can both bring one of our more interesting
bottles."
Learn to Listen
As William James pointed out, "The deepest principle in
human nature is the craving to be appreciated."
You should be governed by the idea that one should seek first
to understand, then to be understood. We're often so worried
about what we're going to say next that we don't hear what's being
said to us now.
There are few ways to signal to your listener that you are inter
ested and listening actively. Take the initiative and be the first per
son to say hello. This demonstrates confidence and immediately
shows your interest in the other person. When the conversation
starts, don't interrupt. Show empathy and understanding by nod
ding your head and involving your whole body in engaging the
person you're talking with. Ask questions that demonstrate (sin
cerely) you believe the other person's opinion is particularly
worth seeking out. Focus on their triumphs. Laugh at their jokes.
And always, always, remember the other person's name. Nothing
is sweeter to someone's ears than their own name. At the moment
of introduction, I visually attach a person's name to their face.
Seconds later, I'll repeat the person's name to make sure I got it,
and then again periodically throughout the conversation.
If All Else Fails, Five Words That Never Do
"You're wonderful. Tell me more."
CONNECTORS' HALL OF FAME PROFILE
Dale Carnegie (1888-1955)
"Learning to 'small talk'is vital."
The late professor Thomas Harrell of Stanford's Graduate School of
Business loved researching the traits of alumni. His chief finding, as
you now know, is that successful graduates are social, communica
tive, and outgoing. "Getting-along skills," more than anything else,
determined who got ahead.
And that's why the legacy of Dale Carnegie—the first person to
sell small talk as a corporate skill—remains intact, nearly seven
decades after the 1936 release of his bestseller How to Win
Friends and Influence People.
For Carnegie, too, small talk became a means for self-advance
ment.
Born in 1 888, the son of a Missouri pig farmer who struggled all
his life, Carnegie grew up ashamed of being poor. The feeling
never quite wore off, and, as a young man, he contemplated sui
cide. When he was twenty-four, and struggling for subsistence
in New York City, Carnegie offered to teach night classes in
public speaking at the 1 25th Street YMCA. Fewer than ten students
attended his first class. For weeks, Carnegie shared with his stu
dents the skills he'd learned as a standout high school debater and
as a student at Missouri State Teachers College. He taught people
how to shirk shyness, boost self-confidence, and ease worry, using
ideas that amount, then and now, to common sense. Remember
people's names. Be a good listener. Don't criticize, condemn, or
complain.
After his first several classes, Carnegie ran out of stories to tell.
So he asked his students to stand up and talk about their own expe
riences—and offered feedback on their performances. It was then
that he realized that as students overcame their fear of taking the
floor, and became more comfortable talking openly about them
selves, their self-confidence rose accordingly.
In Carnegie's classes, businessmen, salesmen, and other profes
sionals found a place devoted to affordable, commonsensical self-
improvement. By 1916, Carnegie's course was so successful that
he needed to train, for the first time, official "Dale Carnegie
Course" instructors. By 1920, Carnegie had published Public
Speaking, an official text that he used to launch Carnegie courses
in Boston, Philadelphia, and Baltimore.
And it's possible none of it would've happened had not
Carnegie encouraged his initial classes to open up and to share
their stories. It's no wonder Carnegie never failed to stress listening
as a crucial networking skill. In an age when computers and e-mail
take the personal touch out of doing business, Carnegie's home
spun logic remains as relevant as ever. People, after all, are still
people, and who couldn't use a reminder of lessons like:
• "Become genuinely interested in other people."
• "Be a good listener. Encourage others to talk about themselves."
• "Let the other person do a great deal of the talking."
• "Smile."
• "Talk in terms of the other person's interests."
• "Give honest and sincere appreciation."
Though he successfully applied the fundamentals of smart small-
talking to his own life, Carnegie was reluctant—at first—to share his
secrets in book form. The course cost $75, and Carnegie wasn't keen
on giving away its content. But Leon Shimkin, an editor at Simon &
Schuster, was a passionate graduate of Carnegie's classes. Shimkin
finally convinced Carnegie, to the benefit of us all, to write a book.
"Perhaps by practicing the very sort of flattery and persistence that
Mr. Carnegie himself advocated and admired—Mr. Shimkin won
him over," wrote Edwin McDowell in the New York Times in 1986.
For Shimkin, and millions more like him, Carnegie emboldened
us with the belief that we can learn to get along better with other
people—and achieve great success—no matter who we are or how
poor we were.