CHAPTER 24
Broadcast Your Brand
Now you have your "content," and the beginnings of a brand.
You're getting good, really good. That's how you've become an
authority in your company. But your job is not done. If the rest of
the world isn't familiar with how good you are, you and your com
pany are only gaining part of the benefit. The fact is, you've got to
extend your reach and level of outside recognition. That's how you'll
become an authority not just in your company but in your industry.
It comes in part from visibility. I'm not suggesting you stand
on your local street corner with a sign on a sandwich board
exclaiming, "Put me on TV!" Though come to think of it... well,
let's hold off for now. I've got some suggestions on high-stakes
self-promotion that will make your effort becoming known a lit
tle bit easier, sans the public embarrassment. And I'm no stranger
to embarrassment. I've taken a few knocks to learn the right and
wrong ways to let others know about what I do.
You don't have to look far to see why increased visibility might
be important for your career, and for extending your network of
colleagues and friends. Take, for example, self-promoting phenom
Donald Trump. How many other real estate moguls do you know
offhand? Right—I can't name anyone else either. Why is the "The
Donald" considered the ultimate dealmaker? Probably because
he's called himself that a million times over in any number of arti
cles and television interviews and now a highly rated TV show.
Because he has a book entitled The Art of the Deal.
But his self-promotion is not just ego (though by how much,
I'm not quite sure); it makes plenty of business sense, too. His
buzz-worthy brand now has a value unto itself. Buildings with his
name on it are more valuable and bring in higher rental fees. When
The Donald went bankrupt, banks that would have otherwise fore
closed on any other struggling mogul gave Trump leeway, not only
because they knew he was good at what he did but because they
knew his name alone would go a long way in helping him recover
from his setbacks. Trump is a talented developer, but then so are a
lot of other people. The difference? He promotes himself.
The fact is that those people who are known beyond the walls
of their own cubicle have a greater value. They find jobs more
easily. They usually rise up the corporate ladder faster. Their net
works begin to grow without much heavy lifting.
I can hear the groans of discomfort already stirring. You may
be thinking, "I'm shy. I don't like to talk about myself. Isn't mod
esty a virtue?" Well, I can assure you that if you hide your accom
plishments, they'll remain hidden. If you don't promote yourself,
however graciously, no one else will.
Like it or not, your success is determined as much by how well
others know your work as by the quality of your work. Luckily,
there are hundreds of new channels and mediums for you to get
the word out.
So how do you promote Brand You?
Every day, you read or hear about companies in newspapers,
magazines, on television, and on the Web. Most of the time the
article or story is about celebrity CEOs and big companies. It's not
because they are more deserving of the press than you or me. It's
the result of well-planned and strategic public relations. Big com
panies have PR machines working for them to shape and control
their image (though not always successfully).
Smaller companies and individuals have to do it themselves.
But by using some pluck and a strategy of your own, access to the
media is not as difficult as you may think. Journalists do less
sleuthing for their stories than you'd imagine. They get a majority
of their stories from people that have sought them out, and not
the other way around. And like everyone else in any profession,
they tend to follow the herd. Which means once you get written
about, other reporters will come calling. Assigned you as a subject,
they'll do a quick Google search, and presto: They'll find you are
an already cited source and will seek you out to cite you again.
One article creates visibility, which in turn will put you in front
of other journalists, creating the possibility of more articles and
visibility. A journalist's deadlines make magazine and newspaper
work the art of the possible, not the perfect.
The key is to view the exposure of your brand as a PR cam
paign. How are you going to get your message out there? How are
you going to make sure that the message gets out the way you want
it to get out? Sure, your network is a good start. Everyone you meet
and everyone you talk to should know what you do, why you're
doing it, and how you can do it for him or her. But why not broad
cast that same message to a thousand networks across the country?
Now we're talking.
As I mentioned before, when I became CEO of YaYa, it was a
company with virtually no revenue, and clearly no recognized
market. We had visionary founders, Jeremy Milken and Seth Ger-
son, but we needed a market.
There was, however, one company with a similar product. I'm
going to call them Big Boy Software. They had created a software
tool that facilitated the actual creation of high-end games. They
too were trying to find their business model and generate revenue.
Both of us were in a race to become the established brand in the
new market we were creating.
Soon after we defined the advergaming space, Big Boy saw how
YaYa was picking up steam (and generating operating revenue)
selling games to big brands. They followed suit, positioning them
selves as competitors to YaYa. The main difference between them
and us was that they had way, way more money. They had raised a
huge amount of capital that put our resources to shame. There is
no need to go into the comparative details of who was a better
company (I'm a little biased, of course). But the fact remains, they
had tons of resources and we did not—at all.
So how did YaYa become the market leader?
The answer is, we created buzz: that powerful, widespread phe
nomenon that can determine the future of individuals, compa
nies, and movies alike. Buzz is the riddle every enterprising person
is trying to solve. It's a grassroots, word-of-mouth force that can
turn a low-budget flick about a witch into a multimillion-dollar
blockbuster. (Ever hear of The Blair Witch Project?) You feel its
energy in Internet chat rooms, at the gym, on the street, and all of
it is stoked by a media hungry for the inside scoop. Buzz is mar
keting on steroids.
Here's an example of how well it works: Remember Napster?
One day it was a clever software idea hatched in some kid's dorm
room allowing users online to link up and share MP3 music files.
Six months later, it was a Silicon Valley start-up, the source of a
major lawsuit, playing bandwidth havoc with servers around the
country. Even when it was shut down, the name had enough buzz
to be bought for something like $50 million.
Advertising or a life-empowering endorsement by Oprah had
nothing to do with it. Napster was, well, cool. And as a result of
buzz, it was very famous.
As a marketer, over the years, I have developed an idea of how
buzz is created. One way is to generate what I call "catalytic
moments." When you watch a big football game, have you noticed
how the tide of a game will suddently turn in favor of one team or
the other? It starts with a huge play, and in many cases is followed
by more key plays. Buzz is like that. It needs a situation, a pivotal
moment, an inside scoop, a crazy giveaway—something that will
get the crowd whispering. Unfortunately, YaYa was too young and
poor for such a strategy.
Another way is to report compelling news by leveraging the
power of the media to get your brand sizzling. The Jesse Ventura for
Governor of Minnesota campaign is a perfect example. Significantly
outspent by two major competitors, Ventura gained valuable media
exposure by persuading the media to report on things like his cre
ative use of advertising and a G.I. Joe-like action figure. Similarly, I
look for compelling stories that create buzz within the news media.
That's where feeding the "infiuentials" comes into play. Infiu-
entials are what marketing wonks call those people who can ignite
brand buzz. They are the small segment of the population that
will adopt a cool product early on and infect everyone else with
the bug. They are also the celebrities and experts whose word is
gospel. It's imperative that you identify those people and get your
brand in front of them.
I mentioned the KPE agency before. They were just what I was
looking for. An interactive marketing and technology consultancy
on the cutting edge, KPE had taken an early interest in the new
space we were creating. They were a recognized name among For
tune 1000 companies known for spotting the newest trends. Hap
pily, their head of strategy was Matt Ringel, whom I had gotten to
know from our mutual interest in the nonprofit devoted to pre
serving objects and places of historical significance, called "Save
American Treasures."
I reached out to Matt and proposed that he lead an effort to
write an article introducing this space to the market. I knew that a
white paper (research documents that consulting companies put
out on hot topics of the day) introducing us and the technology
from an unbiased perspective would be far more effective and lead
to more credibility than anything we could do ourselves. I worked
with Matt and his right hand, Jane Chen, for weeks on the paper,
giving them examples from YaYa, getting clients to speak with
them, introducing methodologies and insights that we had gained
through our experience. I had gone to analysts before this who
were interested in the space and were now willing to speak to Matt
about what we were doing as well.
I was giving KPE another opportunity to look cutting edge and
take a leadership position in the space, while in return, just by dint of
the access I was giving KPE, I bet that YaYa would be the primary
example in the case study. Great things came from the article,
including the new name for the space, which we called (thanks to the
creativity of Jane Chen) "Advergaming." The name alone had buzz.
One lesson we learned from the experience is that your PR
campaign has to be realistic. More often than not, you will have to
start small. You'll be forced to focus on your local paper, high
school and college newsletters, or industry trade journals. Or per
haps just a white paper listed on some consulting company's Web
site. The point is to light the fire.
When the white paper was completed, it received amazing
publicity thanks to KPE's PR engine (which, unlike us, they could
afford), and we indeed came out as the instant leader of the space.
As an interesting side note, I subsequently recruited both Matt
and Jane into YaYa (I wanted the founders of advergaming in my
organization).
It took less than a year for us to appear on the cover of
BrandWeek, in the marketplace section of the Wall Street Journal,
in the technology section of the New York Times, in a feature for
Forbes... the list goes on. I was consistently on every panel with the
competition (generally I was invited for free while "the boys" paid
for the opportunity). While money can certainly be a substitute for
good PR, it's hard to have enough of it to offset the credibility one
gets from just one article in Forbes or the New York Times.
The competition, on the other hand, got little press and failed
to create a distinct message. It all goes back to your content. Once
you have it, you can begin to mold it in a way that will capture
attention. You need to impart a sense of urgency and make the
message timely. Reporters continually ask, "But why is it important
NOW?" If you can't answer that sufficiently, your article will wait.
In YaYa's case, I highlighted how the games industry is the
fastest-growing segment of the entertainment business and how
surprisingly no one had figured out how to tap into that growth
for anything other than pure fun and leisure. That isn't always
enough. I had written a piece for the Wall Street Journal's weekly
column called the Manager's Journal. The editor liked the piece
but kept pushing it back so he could publish other pieces that were
timelier. So I began to rewrite the intros to my piece each week, to
relate to something that was in the news at the time. In short
order, the article finally saw the light of day.
Once you light a fire and get the buzz going, you want to get
your story in front of journalists. The misconception is that you
have to "work" the press. But overeager PR professionals, who
don't know the meaning of "No," are working reporters hourly.
Journalists get fed up with people who are nitwits and pitch arti
cles without substance. The media is like any other business. They
have a job to do. If you can help them do their job better, or easier,
they're going to love you.
You have to start today building relationships with the media
before you have a story you'd like them to write. Send them infor
mation. Meet them for coffee. Call regularly to stay in touch. Give
them inside scoops on your industry. Establish yourself as a will
ing and accessible source of information, and offer to be inter
viewed for print, radio, or TV. Never say, "No comment."
To illustrate: I remember the first time I, as the newly minted
project leader of Deloitte's reengineering efforts, sat with one of
Fortune's top journalists, Tom Stewart. My PR firm introduced Tom
and me, and I came ready to impress. I had read every piece he had
written in the last five years. I playfully gibed him about obscure
predictions he had made years ago in other articles, and was pre
pared to thoughtfully discuss his most recent column. I wanted to
be as useful as possible, giving him access to trends, ideas, and all the
contacts at my disposal. I did the same thing for other journalists at
other major newspapers and magazines.
Tom and I had a blast. Tom's energy and intellectual curiosity
was contagious. I suppose I had something to offer him as well,
because he readily took my next lunch offer and the next after that.
It was more than just mutual admiration. I was prepared to
act, sound, and feel like an expert. When I didn't know something,
I was sure to pass him on to the person who did. If you are con
stantly apologizing with "Well, I am not the expert," people will
believe you and wonder why you wasted their time.
I never did ask Tom for anything in particular. We'd meet a few
times a year and I'd try to be as helpful as possible. Sure, I remem
ber the first time I saw one of my ideas in his column months after
we had discussed it, and lo and behold, a competitor firm was
quoted rather than Deloitte. I went through the roof. My instinct
was to call him immediately and express my unhappiness. But,
instead, I held back and simply invited him for another lunch.
Is such a thing too time-consuming? Not if you're convinced it
behooves your company's efforts and if you enjoy the interaction.
When I was at Deloitte and would show up on TV, I was Deloitte.
When I was in Forbes, it was the company that reaped the benefits
in business development.
Over time, the hours you put in developing relationships with
journalists will pay off, as it did for me with Tom, both personally
and professionally. Deloitte's name eventually started to pop up
with increasing frequency in the pages of Fortune, because our
stories were being heard by someone who could retell them. I
never asked Tom for an article, but giving him good ideas in our
lunches certainly didn't hurt. Today, Tom is the editor-in-chief of
the Harvard Business Review, and I'm planning to take him to
lunch soon to hear out a few more ideas. Remember, though, you
can't force-feed or pressure a good journalist. Any attempt to do
so will surely end your professional relationship. The best journal
ists are almost always also the most ethical.
In traversing the media landscape, be aware that there are also
some land mines. Sometimes what media wants to write, and the
story you think they should write, is a very different thing.
I learned this the hard way. One day I got a call from the well-
known reporter Hal Lancaster, who was writing a column about
managing one's career for the Wall Street Journal. The story appeared
Tuesday, November 19,1996.1 know the exact date because I had
the article framed so I would never forget the lesson I learned.
When Hal called, I was ecstatic. He was a famous reporter for a
prestigious newspaper asking about what I did. I was a relative kid
at Deloitte. Well, that wasn't exactly the slant of the story, but my
excitement got the best of me. Hal said he was doing a piece on the
changing nature of work. He had a hypothesis that the end of the
reengineering movement was having a major impact on those
who had led reengineering projects and those who had been
affected by the projects.
Rather than listen more closely to his angle, I tried to impress
upon him what I thought the real story was about. Big mistake! If
a reporter calls you, states his story and the angle he's taking, you
can be sure you'll be used as an example to buttress his angle. Rare
is the occasion that a journalist will hear you out and say, "Oh my
God, you're right! I'm going about it all wrong." Rarely—I meant
never. But back then, I thought I'd set Hal straight. He, however,
ended up straightening me out.
I took a lot of time with Hal explaining how I had been on the
normal partner track leading Deloitte's reengineering effort, but
now that the trend was ending, I was transitioning into an exciting
special project involving marketing. "I'm going to change the way
traditional consulting companies market themselves."
He pushed past my excitement. "Do you feel displaced in the
post-reengineering world?" he wanted to know. Sure, I conceded,
there was some change involved, but certainly nothing traumatic.
He wanted me to say I felt aimless. But my new gig excited me. I
considered it a huge step up.
The day the story appeared, I ran to the newsstand to get the
paper. There, blaring out for everyone to see, was the heading "A
demotion does not have to mean the end of a fulfilling career."
Right above the fold in BIG BOLD letters was my name: "Mr. Fer-
razzi says the change was difficult, but he has embraced the assign
ment as an opportunity."
He was implying I was demoted!
I got slammed. Oh, and the ribbing I got from my boss, Pat
Loconto. "So, I heard you were demoted and no one reports to
you. That's terrific! It will save us tons on HR costs, starting with
that raise of yours."
Be careful. Listen to the reporter when he or she says, "I'm
doing a story about displaced workers .. ." No matter what YOU
say, that's the story he'll write.
Now that you know a little more about the lay of the land, it's
time to get yourself buzzing. Here's an action plan for creating a
PR strategy for Brand You:
You Are Your Own Best PR Representative
You must manage your own media. Public relations companies
are facilitators and act as leverage. I've been represented for years.
The best ones can be strategic partners, but ultimately the press
always wants to talk to the big guy—you, not a PR rep. Most of the
biggest articles about me came from my own contacts. Yes, a PR firm
can help you generate those contacts, but early in your career you
won't need them and you probably won't be able to afford them.
Who better than you to tell your story with credibility and pas
sion? Start making calls to the reporters who cover your industry.
Have lunch with them. If something timely occurs around your
content, send a press release. There's no secret behind press
releases. They're nothing more than two or three paragraphs
describing what's memorable about your story. It is that easy.
Remember, media folks are just plain fun. They tend to be
interesting and smart, and they're paid to be up to speed on every
thing that is going on in the world. And they need you as much as
you need them. They may not need your exact story at the exact
time you want, but with a little stick-to-itiveness, they'll come
around.
Know the Media Landscape
Nothing infuriates reporters and editors more, I'm told, than
to get a pitch from someone who clearly has no idea what their
publication is about or who their audience is. Remember, media is
a business, and the companies who are in the media are looking
for ratings or to sell more issues. The only way they can do that
well is by serving their specific audience. "Listen, I'm a devoted
reader of this magazine," I'll tell editors while mentioning a few
recent articles I've enjoyed. "I've got a story for you that I know
your audience will be interested in, as I've been thinking about it
for a long time." That's not a line, either. Before I call journalists,
I'll spend time reading their articles, figuring out what they cover,
and what kinds of stories their publications like to run.
Work the Angles
There are no new stories, it has been said, only old stories told
in new ways. To make your pitch sound fresh and original, find
an innovative slant. What's your slant? Anything that screams,
"Now!" Let's say you're opening a pet store. To a magazine devoted
to entrepreneurs, perhaps you play up how your store is one
recent example of the entrepreneurial boom in the opening of
local retail stores. Suggest why this is happening and what the
magazine's readers could learn. Selling it to your local newspaper
is easy. What caused you to switch careers? What is particular to
your situation that highlights something going on within your
community? And don't forget catalytic moments. Maybe you sell
a rare animal no one else does. Or maybe you plan on giving away
puppies to orphans. That's something worth covering to a local or
neighborhood newspaper. Get the word out.
Think Small
Are you Bill Gates? No. Maybe you've developed the antidote
for the common cold? No again. Well, the New York Times proba
bly isn't knocking on your door quite yet. Go local first. Start a
database of newspapers and magazines in your area that might be
interested in your content. Try college papers, the neighborhood
newspaper, or the free industry digital newsletter you find in your
inbox. You'll get the fire started and learn how to deal with
reporters in the process.
Make a Reporter Happy
They're a rushed, impatient, always-stressed bunch of over-
achievers. Work at their pace and be available whenever they call
on you. NEVER blow off an interview, and try to facilitate the
contacts they'll need to produce a good story.
Master the Art of the Sound Bite
Tell me why I should write about you in ten seconds or less. If
it takes more than ten seconds to pitch your content, a television
producer will assume you won't be able to get your point of view
across to an impatient audience. And a reporter might try to hus
tle you off the phone.
Learn to be brief—in both your written and phone pitches.
Brevity is cherished in the media. Look at the evolution of the
modern sound bite: Some thirty years ago, a presidential nominee
was allowed an average sound bite of forty-two seconds. Today, it's
somewhere under seven seconds. If the President is only getting a
few seconds, how much time do you think you'll get? Think in
terms of talking points. Pick the three most interesting points
about your story and make them fast, make them colorful, and
make them catchy.
Don't Be Annoying
There's a fine line between marketing yourself properly and
becoming annoying. If a pitch of mine gets rejected, I'll ask
what else it needs to make it publishable. Sometimes it will
never be right in the editor's eyes, but other times, you can answer
a few more questions or dig deeper and repitch the story. It is
okay to be aggressive, but mind the signals, and back off when
it's time.
It's All on the Record
Be cautious: What you say can hurt you, and even if you're not
quoted or you say something off the record, a reporter will use
your words to color the slant of the article. I'm not advocating
being tight-lipped. That's what corporate communications direc
tors get paid for, and I don't know anyone in the press who likes
them. Just remember: All press is not good press, even if they spell
your name right.
Trumpet the Message, Not the Messenger
There was a time when I was less aware of the difference
between reputation and notoriety. Boy, there is a big difference!
Early on in my career, I paid too much attention to getting atten
tion. I was building a brand all right; but as I look back, it just
wasn't the brand I wanted for myself. All your efforts at publicity,
promotion, and branding need to feed into your mission; if they're
only feeding into your ego, you'll find yourself with a reputation
you hadn't bargained for that could hold you back for the rest of
your life. I was lucky. Looking back, I merely wasted a lot of time.
Treat Journalists as You Would Any Other Member of
Your Network or Community of Friends
As in any interview, your primary objective when you meet
with a member of the press is to get the person across from you to
like you. The reporter is human (at least most are) and your
empathy for his or her hard work will go a long way. Even when I
feel like a piece did not do me justice, I thank the writer for his
hard work. I'll send a short thank-you e-mail no matter the size of
the publication. Journalists, by the nature of their profession, are
natural networkers. Couple that with a media community that's
not all that large, and you'll understand why you want these guys
on your side.
Be a Name-Dropper
Connecting your story with a known entity—be it a politician,
celebrity, or famous businessperson—acts as a de facto slant. Bot
tom line: The media wants recognizable faces in their pages. If
your story will give them access to someone they otherwise
haven't been able to get, they'll make concessions. Or, sometimes,
you can link a celebrity to your story without really knowing the
person. Leave it to the journalist to track down the star. You've
done your job by giving them reason to seek her out.
You've Got to Market the Marketing
Once you've put in all that hard work and landed a nice article,
it's no time to be modest. Send the article around. Give it to your
alumni magazine. Update your class notes. Use the article to get
even more press coverage. I'll attach a recent article about me to
an e-mail and in the subject line write, "Here's another one of Fer-
razzi's shameless attempts at self-promotion." Most people get a
kick out of it and it keeps you on everyone's radar.
There's No Limit to the Ways You Can Go About
Enhancing Your Profile
There are literally thousands of different ways to get recogni
tion for your expertise. Try moonlighting. See if you have the time
to take on freelance projects that will bring you in touch with a
whole new group of people. Or, within your own company, take
on an extra project that might showcase your new skills. Teach a
class or give a workshop at your own company. Sign up to be on
panel discussions at a conference. Most important, remember that
your circle of friends, colleagues, clients, and customers is the
most powerful vehicle you've got to get the word out about what
you do. What they say about you will ultimately determine the
value of your brand.