# Module 1: Introduction To Project Execution
## Introduction to Course 4
# Introduction to Course 4 Hi there. If you've gone through our previous courses, you've spent a lot of time digging into the intricacies and significance of setting up a project for success. And now, we're at the project execution stage where all of that hard work comes together. If you haven't gone through our previous courses yet, we recommend checking them out. Before we get started, let me introduce myself.
My name's Elita, and I'll be your instructor for this course. I work as a Senior Engineering Program Manager at Google, where I currently lead the team behind routing and navigation on Google Maps. I joined the company in 2007, working on teams across Google's engineering organization in New York, London, and Seattle. In 2013, I joined the Google Maps team and launched popular features like holiday hours and attributes on businesses, while leading global teams from New York to Sydney to Hyderabad.
Generally, I like solving problems and learning new things. Every new project and team allows me to do both. I'm excited to lead you through this course and demonstrate how to put a project plan into action. First step, you'll learn more about risks and unforeseen changes through the project. If you've taken our previous courses, you might recall that change is inevitable. And to combat that, we've covered the concept of risk mitigation during the planning phase.
And now we'll take it one step further and discuss what to do when a risk actually materializes. Next, I'll discuss tracking and quality. You'll learn how to track and measure your project's progress, and you'll learn how to use continuous improvement and quality management techniques to keep the project on track and running smoothly. These best practices are valuable to just about any role, and I'm looking forward to taking you through them.
Other big aspects of running a project include decision-making. You'll learn to both use and analyze data to inform your decision-making, and then, in turn, use that data to explore and explain key aspects of your project. I'll also discuss team management and the fundamentals of influencing. So much of the success of a project relies on teamwork, and you'll learn more about how you, as a project manager, can effectively lead your team to the finish line.
Speaking of teamwork, I'll share some of the tools that provide effective team communication along with tips for organizing and facilitating meetings. And then, we'll wrap up by discussing how to close a project. You'll learn the steps required to finish a project and the importance of celebrating a job well done with your team. Sounds kind of fun, right? After all that planning, this is the point in the project life cycle where work gets done and everything comes together.
Ready to get started? Meet me in the next video, where you'll learn about the importance of tracking and measuring project progress.
## Course 4 overview
Course 4 overview Hello! Welcome to the fourth of the seven courses in the Google Project Management Certificate program. - Foundations of Project Management — Learn the fundamentals of project management and how this program will prepare you for project management roles in numerous types of industries. Then, explore the different types of career paths you might pursue, the responsibilities and essential skills of a project manager, the importance of the project life cycle, common project management methodologies, and how organizational structure and culture impact project management.
- Project Initiation: Starting a Successful Project— Discover how to set the stage for a successful project. Learn about stakeholders, their level of influence, and how to mobilize and manage them, as well as tackle tasks to identify project scope, goals, deliverables, and success criteria. - Project Planning: Putting it All Together— Explore how to map out a project in the second phase of the project life cycle: the project planning phase.
Examine the key components of a project plan, how to make accurate time estimates, and how to set milestones. - Project Execution: Running the Project— (current course) Delve into the execution and closing phases of the project life cycle. Learn what aspects of a project to track and how to track them, as well as how to effectively manage and communicate changes, dependencies, and risks.
- Agile Project Management— Explore the history, approach, and philosophy of Agile project management, including the Scrum framework. Learn how to differentiate and blend Agile and other project management approaches. Discover more about Scrum, exploring its pillars and values and comparing essential Scrum team roles. - Capstone: Applying Project Management in the Real World— Develop a portfolio of project management artifacts that will demonstrate the skills you have learned throughout the entire program, such as your ability to manage stakeholders and teams, organize plans, and communicate project details.
- Accelerate Your Job Search with AI— Gain practical job search strategies and learn how to leverage AI tools (like Gemini and NotebookLM) to uncover your most valuable skills, create a job search plan, manage your applications, and practice for interviews as you navigate your path to your next role. This course will delve into the execution and closing phases of the project life cycle. You will learn what aspects of a project to track and how to track them.
You will also learn how to effectively manage and communicate changes, dependencies, and risks. As you explore quality management, you will learn how to measure customer satisfaction and implement continuous improvement and process improvement techniques. Next, you will examine how to prioritize data, how to use data to inform your decision-making, and how to effectively present that data.
Then, you will strengthen your leadership skills as you study the stages of team development and how to manage team dynamics. After that, you will discover tools that provide effective project team communication, how to organize and facilitate meetings, and how to effectively communicate project status updates. Finally, you will examine the steps of the project closing process and how to create and share project closing documentation.
Current Google project managers will continue to instruct and provide you with hands-on approaches for accomplishing these tasks while showing you the best project management tools and resources for the job. In this reading, you will learn about the Project Management Certificate program structure and course functionality. If you already read this in the last course and don't need a refresher, feel free to skip it.
If you’re new to the program, welcome! We’ve specifically designed the program you’re about to explore to help every type of learner successfully finish the certificate and get ready for a role in project management. No previous experience is required. Become job-ready In this Google Project Management Certificate program, you will learn the foundations of traditional project management and gain insight into Agile project management.
According to the Project Management Institute, the project management labor force in seven project-oriented sectors is expected to grow by 33 percent, or nearly 22 million new jobs, by 2027. We are excited to join you on this journey as you learn the skills to begin a career in one of today’s most in-demand professions. Course 4 covers six modules of material. Each module includes a series of lessons with many types of learning opportunities, such as: - Videos with a Google employee as your instructor.
- Readings to introduce new ideas and case studies and to build on the concepts from the videos. - Connect with other learners: If you have a question, chances are, you’re not alone. You can visit Coursera’s private Project Management Community to expand your network, discuss career journeys, and share experiences. Check out the quick start guide. - In-video questions that will pop up from time to time.
They’re designed for you to check your learning as you go! - Practice quizzes to check your understanding and give you valuable feedback. Practice activities will provide you with a hands-on opportunity to apply skills you are working to master. You will assess your work by answering quiz questions about it or by comparing it to an exemplar built by our course team. Note: these activities will not count towards your final course grade, but you are strongly encouraged to complete them as they will help prepare you for the graded quizzes and peer reviews.
- Graded quizzes on video and reading content to measure your progress. - Ungraded peer-review activities on video and reading content that provide you the opportunity to practice applying skills you are working to master. Other learners in your course will see the work you submit and give you feedback based on a rubric. - Graded peer-review activities on video and reading content that assess your ability to apply skills you are working to master.
Other learners in your course will grade your work and give you feedback based on a rubric. Everyone learns differently, so we designed this program to let you work at your own pace. Although your personalized deadlines start when you enroll, they’re just a guide. Feel free to move through the program however it works best for you. Keep in mind, you can always reset your deadlines by clicking the blue reset my deadlines button.
There’s no penalty for late assignments. To earn your certificate, all you have to do is complete all of the work. Tips - We strongly recommend you take all six courses—and complete the items in each lesson—in the order they appear, as new information and concepts build on previous ones. - Make the most of the readings and additional resources throughout the program. They’re designed to support your learning.
- If something is confusing, don’t hesitate to rewatch a video, go through a reading again, or ask your classmates for advice in the Community. - Take part in all learning opportunities to gain as much knowledge and experience possible. Congratulations on choosing to take this first step toward becoming a part of the wonderful world of project management. Enjoy the journey! Source: PMI (2017).
Project Management Job Growth and Talent Gap 2017–2027.
## Helpful resources to get started
Helpful resources to get started The Google Project Management Certificate will provide you with new lessons in each module. As you’ve learned, each lesson includes a series of videos, readings, activities, in-video questions, practice quizzes, and graded quizzes. In this reading, you’ll learn about providing feedback on course content, obtaining the Google Project Management Certificate, and acquiring helpful habits for successfully completing this certificate program.
Providing feedback on course content Please remember to give feedback on videos, readings, and materials. Just open the resource and look for the thumbs-up and thumbs-down symbols. - Click thumbs-up for materials that are helpful. - Click thumbs-down for materials that are not helpful. If you want to flag a specific issue with the item, click the flag icon, select a category, and then optionally type an explanation in the text box.
This feedback goes to the course developers, not other learners, and helps create even better programs in the future. For technical help, visit the Learner Help Center. Obtaining the Google Project Management Certificate To receive your official Google Project Management Certificate, you must: - Pass all graded assignments in all 6 courses of the certificate program. Each graded assignment is part of a cumulative graded score for the course, and the passing grade for each course is 80%.
AND one of the following: - Pay the course certificate fee, - Be approved for Coursera Financial Aid, or - Complete the certificate through an educational institution, employer, or agency that's sponsoring your participation. Helpful habits to successfully complete the certificate As a learner, you’re bringing all of your past experiences and best learning practices to this program. The designers of this course have also put together a list of helpful habits that they believe will help you to be successful: - Plan your time: Setting regular study times and sticking with them each week can help you make learning a part of your routine.
Use a calendar or timetable to create a schedule, and list what you plan to do each day in order to break your work down into achievable goals. Create a quiet place to watch the videos, review the readings, and complete the activities so you can really focus on the material. - Be curious: If you find an idea that gets you excited, act on it! Ask questions, search for more details online, check out the links that interest you, and take notes on your discoveries.
The little things you do to support your learning along the way will take your knowledge even further, open more doors in this high-growth field, and help you qualify for jobs. - Take notes: Notes are useful-to-remember information that you think might be important in the future, especially as you’re preparing to enter a new job field. In addition, taking notes is an effective way to make connections between topics and gain a better understanding of those topics.
- Build your career identity: Your career identity is the unique value you bring to the workforce. Watch this video to learn about the key components of career identity and write your own career identity statement. Discovering and defining your own career identity makes you better equipped to choose a career path that aligns with your strengths, values, and goals and is more effective in your chosen profession.
- Connect with other learners: If you have a question, chances are, you’re not alone. You can visit Coursera’s private Google Project Management Community to expand your network, discuss career journeys, and share experiences. Check out the quick start guide. - Update your profile: Consider updating your profile on Coursera. This link appears in the menu when you click on your name at the top-right corner of this screen.
When classmates find you in the Community, they can click on your name to view your profile and get to know you more. Finding more information Throughout this course, you will learn the basics of project management. We will provide a lot of information through videos and readings. But sometimes, you may need to look things up on your own for additional learning. Things change fast in this growing field, so it is critical to do your own research so you can stay up-to-date on what is new.
Here are some helpful project management resources available online: - The Project Management Institute is the leading association for those in project, program, or portfolio management professions. Their website provides guides, industry standards, articles, templates, job boards, certifications, and more to help support professionals in these careers. - The Scrum Guide defines Scrum, a technique used in Agile project management.
You’ll learn about this framework later in the program. This guide describes Scrum’s roles, events, artifacts, and the rules that bind them together. You can also find hundreds of free resources to learn more about Scrum at Scrum.org Resources. Digital documents, spreadsheets, and presentations You will complete activities using a variety of digital documents, spreadsheets, and presentation templates.
These templates align with the document types that project managers often use to create, edit, and collaborate with their team and organization. Digital documents make it easy to collaborate in real time and stay organized. If you’re not familiar with these types of tools, check out the course Resources. Glossary This course will cover a lot of terms and concepts, some of which you may already know and some of which will be new.
To remind yourself about what a term means, refer to this Glossary. Accessibility guidelines When you create written or visual content or plan a meeting or event, follow these Accessibility Tips to make it more accessible to everyone, including people with disabilities.
## The importance of tracking
# The importance of tracking Hi again. In previous courses, we've discussed the importance of breaking your project down into milestones and tasks and assigning those tasks to different members of your team. We've also discussed setting a schedule and budget. But once the project execution phase gets going, how do you actually know that the work is getting done? Well, you can do this in a few ways, but primarily, you can keep tabs on project progress by tracking and measurement.
This is actually a big part of project management. Tracking, by definition, is a method of following the progress of a project's activities. Measuring project performance regularly to identify deviations from the project plan can help ensure that the project stays on track. A deviation is anything that alters your original course of action. Deviations from the project plan can be positive or negative.
Are you ahead of schedule because a technical problem is less complex than you estimated? Thumbs up. Did a natural disaster shut down your testing team? Big thumbs down. Both of these are examples of deviations. They're also examples of why tracking is such a crucial part of your role during the project execution phase. Let's examine some of the ways that tracking is beneficial for your project's success.
To start, tracking makes key project information transparent, and transparency is essential for accurate decision-making. Even the strongest project managers make poor decisions when they lack information or context. Tracking centralizes project information so that everyone can understand the status of each part of the project, which can then help you identify gaps in your knowledge.
Also, projects have so many little details. It's hard to keep everything straight. Tracking helps ensure that you don't risk forgetting something. Second, tracking helps keep all team members and stakeholders in touch with deadlines and goals. To ensure that everyone has visibility into project progress, you should have a project plan that works both for you and your team. This way you're all on the same page about how the project is progressing.
You will learn about different ways to track a project later in this module. Tracking is also crucial for recognizing risks and issues that can derail your progress. With effective tracking, you will be able to identify issues in a timely fashion and work with your team to take corrective action. By providing visibility into the various parts of the project, tracking helps you and your team identify and focus on areas at risk.
And finally, tracking helps build confidence that the project is set to be delivered on time, in-scope, and within budget. Having a clear, up-to-date picture of the overall project status keeps the team motivated and focused on staying the course. So to recap, tracking is important for a few key reasons, like transparency, risk management, and keeping the project on track. Coming up, we'll take you through some of the key items to track during project execution.
Meet you there.
## Common items to track
# Common items to track So we've discussed that tracking monitors the progress of project activities. But you may still be wondering, what specifically should you be tracking? I'll take you through a few of the most commonly tracked items that I found helpful when managing projects at Google. First, you should always track the project schedule. This is made up of tasks and activities that ensure that the project is effectively heading toward its completion date.
After all, your ultimate goal is to complete your deliverables on time. Equally important is tracking the status of action items, key tasks, and activities to ensure that that work is actually getting done. Tracking tasks also helps to track your team's progress toward milestones. We learned a bit more about tracking progress toward milestones earlier in the course, and we stressed the importance of creating tasks and milestones to keep everyone on track.
When you're in the middle of a project, new tasks will come up all the time. In order to avoid missing deadlines, it's imperative to track tasks as they progress and as you approach key milestones. Next, you'll also need to track costs to ensure that you don't overspend or underspend on project tasks. As I mentioned earlier, all projects have budgets, and whether or not you're overseeing the entire budget, you may be overseeing tasks and resources that have budget implications.
Finally, you'll need to track key decisions, changes, dependencies, and risks to the project, including any agreed upon scope changes. This way, your team and stakeholders are aligned on what needs to be done for the project to succeed. We will cover this in more detail throughout the course since it's a big part of running the project. To recap, the items that are helpful to track throughout the project execution phase include the project schedule, which contains the key tasks and activities, the status of action items, progress toward milestones, costs, and key decisions and changes.
There are many moving parts to be aware of once a project is underway. Tracking them closely benefits you and your team as you head toward the project goal. I've taken you through an introduction to tracking, and coming up, we'll discuss project management tools and templates you can use to track project activities. Meet me in the next video to expand your toolkit.
## Different tracking methods
# Different tracking methods Welcome back. Now that you understand how essential tracking is, let's explore and compare various types of tracking methods. The purpose of your project plan is to guide you through the execution of your project. Therefore, it will always include at least one type of tracking method, and sometimes you might use more than one depending on what your team needs.
The tracking methods we'll discuss in this video are a Gantt chart, a roadmap, and a burndown chart. There are many others, but these are the few that I'm going to focus on. Whichever type you choose depends on what you deem suitable for your project. It's important to remember to select something that the entire team can easily understand, reference, and keep up to date. Let's compare the tracking methods I mentioned.
Perhaps the most common tracking method of all is the Gantt chart. It's a tried and true tool to keep your project on track. A Gantt chart measures tasks against time and includes useful information, like who will own each task and what the order of the tasks should be. For this reason, it's a useful chart for staying on schedule and for projects with many dependencies or tasks or activities or milestones that are reliant on one another.
It's also a helpful chart for teams with a lot of people, because ownership and responsibilities are explicitly laid out visually. As you track and move along sequentially over time, this starts to look like a waterfall; hence, why Gantt charts are commonly used in Waterfall project management. Each task is represented by a horizontal progress bar, and the length of the bar is dependent on how much time is allotted to the task.
The bars are stacked on top of each other to denote that the task at the top must be completed before the next one below it can be completed. Gantt charts typically live in your project plan and are updated as the project progresses. Another common tracking method we have here at Google is a roadmap. A roadmap is best suited for when you need a way to track big milestones in your project.
It's useful for illustrating how a project should evolve over time to a team and key stakeholders. Here's an example: a roadmap might list your project's goals at the top and a description of the approach we'll be taking to meet those goals. In this example, the goals are to increase online business-to-consumer sales by 20 percent year-over-year and to increase holiday sales to existing customers by eight percent over last year.
The approach details the main tactics your team will use to reach your goal. A roadmap also includes a high-level project overview. High-level in this context means a concise summary, usually three-to-four sentences, to clearly state the objectives and priorities for your project. Below the goals, approach, and overview is a table that maps out what the process will entail. In this example, our table is divided into quarters that reflect the project timeline.
A quarter is a three-month period on a company's financial calendar. Key milestones are listed for each quarter. Then, there are tasks that each team member or department needs to complete. Most tasks may map to a milestone due within the same quarter. In our example, the project as a whole has a key milestone in Q1 to finalize inventory for the holiday season. The work of product testing and finalizing suggestions for offerings mainly falls to the marketing and sales teams.
However, sometimes the tasks may need to be completed in advance to unblock another team or milestone in future quarters. The product and engineering team is working on tasks in Q1 and in Q2 that lead up to the launch of the refreshed online store in Q3. In order to reach that milestone, each department needs to complete specific tasks, and the roadmap tracks both individual and project progress toward milestones.
Finally, there's the burndown chart, the most granular of the three tracking methods. A burndown chart measures time against the amount of work done and the amount of work remaining. Their main uses are to keep the project team on top of targeted completion dates and to keep the team aware of scope creep as it occurs. Burndown charts are best suited for projects that require a detailed, broken-down review of each task associated with a project, and they're great for projects where finishing on time is the top priority.
The y-axis or the vertical axis symbolizes the number of tasks left to complete, and the x-axis or the horizontal axis signifies time. Progress gets tracked from the upper left-hand corner of the chart. As the project goes along, you'll track down, working your way towards zero remaining tasks, and to the right, working your way toward your end date. There's typically a dotted line for your expected or projected progress based on the rate your team's expected to close tasks, and a solid line representing your actual progress.
Before you continue on with your project, you'll need to decide which tracker makes the most sense. If you need to communicate milestones to a large team, you might choose a roadmap. If you have a project with multiple dependencies, you might choose a Gantt chart. If tracking tasks against your deadline is especially important, then the burndown chart might be your best option. And you may even decide to use more than one.
Because the tracking method will be determined by the type of project you're working on, your resources, and the project scope, you'll probably end up using several types of tracking methods at some point in your career. In my time at Google, I've regularly combined methods and used a few different types together. For example, using a Gantt chart to scope work at the beginning of a project, then switching to a burndown chart in the weeks before a launch to make sure we're good to go.
Now you know a bit more about the various types of tracking methods, including a roadmap, Gantt chart, and burndown chart. Next step, we'll focus on understanding continuous improvement and process improvement.
## Belinda: tracking and managing a budget
# Belinda: tracking and managing a budget Hi my name is Belinda and I'm a program manager with Google. My role with Google has been building budgets for the last several years, there's a lot that goes into building data center budgets. It can take quite some time, and they're due every year for the renewal of the following year by September 1st. The budget is entailed of anything you can think of down to janitorial services for the data center site, all the way to UPS units to have to run it's battery backup, in case we lose power.
So the role that I have had for several years has been to not only build the budget but to figure out and work with the team and also vendors, on what money is needed funding as we grow as a site as well. And for me what I've always done is built a Google sheet, and I've used that year over year line item by line item, and I break it down per the account GL, account code, and also with the D channel that references to that. And basically that is just the categories of whether we're dealing with mechanical electrical chillers, maintenance for the lawn RTU units, mechanical concepts, labor, repairing services to the elevators, lifts, golf carts, generators.
You do a line by line item for anything that takes a data center to run. So it can be very convoluted and quite difficult, but I have always found that the Google Sheet is the best method for my base structure if where I start, currently there's four managers that I build that budget with. We have a meeting and go over the budgets to be clear and as transparent you can be to make sure that you've got everything in there that was requested.
What has happened over the years is what we'll have is we'll have a manager, that will be the lead with me on the budget. So that when we go to submit the budget, and we're at a director level meeting, when we're submitting this, I have a FM manager from the site that is actually overseeing that budget. It depends on who you're working with, but they're going to know what their needs are and they can help you understand when they need those needs, and how much money they need.
So for anyone that's looking to go into project management, budget management, I think that that they really need to know that they they love math. And they need to also love change because change happens so often with project management and dealing with budgets because they change hourly, sometimes they change daily. Sometimes you have a really, really calm week where everything went like it was supposed to, and then sometimes it's chaos.
For me, I like being busy and I like change, I'm not afraid of it, but I think that people that would be interested in this type of role would need to understand that that's going to be there. So anyone who's starting to build budgets with Google, it can be quite overwhelming even though with the experience that I had it was overwhelming for me. And I had to figure out a platform for me and the sheet that made sense so I could track it.
But I think that the advice I would give anyone that's starting out with budgets would be take it one day at a time, you don't learn all in one day it can be overwhelming, but to break it down maybe and in smaller pieces.
## Choose the right tracking method for your project
Choose the right tracking method for your project So far, you've learned about the importance of tracking project progress. You’ve also reviewed some of the different tracking methods used by project managers, like project plans, Gantt and Burndown charts, and Roadmaps. This reading will explore and compare these popular tracking methods in more detail so you can feel more confident choosing the best method for your projects.
Gantt charts The Gantt chart is one of the most popular tracking methods and can be used for all types of projects. Gantt charts typically live in your project plan and are updated as the project progresses. Gantt charts are useful for: - Helping a team stay on schedule - Projects with lots of tasks, dependencies, and milestones - Projects with large teams, because ownership and responsibilities are explicitly laid out visually Asana, one of the work management software tools featured in this certification, has useful resources for getting started with Gantt charts.
Practice working with Gantt charts on your own with a free Asana trial or by downloading a free Gantt chart template from Google Sheets or Microsoft Excel. Want to learn more? Check out these resources: Asana help article: New to Gantt charts? Start here. Roadmaps Roadmaps are another common tracking method. Like Gantt charts, Roadmaps also track both individual and project progress toward milestones.
However, Roadmaps are best suited for tracking big milestones in your project. Roadmaps are useful for: - High-level tracking of large milestones. Roadmaps outline the project as a whole and provide an overall snapshot of key points—just like an actual roadmap contains points of interest and mile markers. - Illustrating to your team or key stakeholders how a project should evolve over time Roadmaps can be built using different tools.
You can create a Roadmap in a document (like this example). Smartsheet has useful resources for getting started with Roadmaps. Practice working with Roadmaps on your own with a free Smartsheet trial or by downloading this Roadmap template created with Google Sheets. Want to learn more? Check out these resources: Smartsheet help article: Everything you need to know about Project Roadmaps Free Product Roadmap templates from Smartsheet Burndown charts Burndown charts are typically used by Agile Scrum teams.
Burndown charts reveal how quickly your team is working by displaying how much work is left and how much time remains to complete the work. The main uses of a Burndown chart are to keep the project team on top of targeted completion dates and make them aware of scope creep if it occurs. The chart should be displayed so everyone can see it and needs to be updated regularly in order to be effective.
Burndown charts are useful for: - Projects that require a detailed review of tasks - Projects where finishing on time is the top priority Note: If you'd like to learn about Agile and Scrum, which are popular project management approaches, check out Course 5 of this certificate, Agile Project Management. A Burndown chart helps you, as a project manager, understand how your team works and what influences their ability to complete tasks on time. This way, you can address issues right away, before they become major problems.
They also help you plan more efficiently for the next project by identifying potential problem areas. Jira is a work management software tool that has useful resources for getting started with Burndown charts. Practice working with Burndown charts on your own with a free Jira trial or by downloading this Burndown chart template created with Google Sheets. Want to learn more? Check out these resources: Jira help article: Learn how to use burndown charts in Jira software ProjectManager.com article: Burndown Chart: What Is It & How Do I Use It?
## Pranjal: Managing multiple tracks
# Pranjal: Managing multiple tracks Hi, my name is Pranjal, and I work as a program manager in the Site Reliability Engineering org. You can also call it SRE. What SRE does is they are primarily responsible for all the critical services within Google, and in case something goes wrong, we are the first line of defense. I think I can talk about the first big project I managed at Google.
My tech lead and I co-founded this project about three years ago, and I continue to work on it as of right now. So the project of what we wanted to do in terms of ambition was we wanted to generalize some tooling to help mobile apps be reliable in production. So what that means is, let's say you're using a mobile app. We want to make sure that in case something goes wrong, we detect it before the user does, and we take action before the user even knows that something's wrong behind the scenes, right?
So we started out with this project, and my biggest fear in terms of working on this project was managing a trade off between ambition and project quality. So when we did our brainstorming sessions, and we wrote out a roadmap, it just seemed a bit too overwhelming—the scale at which we were planning to work. I think I would be really thankful to my manager at the time. She said, she gave me some really good advice, she said, "In case you have, let's say, five different tracks going on in a very big project, not all five tracks have to be worked on every single day.
You could probably take out a quarter and make super-good progress on maybe track three and track five, whereas you can bootstrap the other tracks to make progress on it in the next quarter." So that gave me a bit of peace of mind. And she also empowered me to think in terms of—I'm in a position as a program manager to push and pull on those priorities. As long as people are aware of what we're working on, what risks need to be identified and mitigated, and if everything's being tracked properly, it's okay to maybe accelerate sometimes and pause sometimes In fact, I learned that zooming out and pausing sometimes can result in original ideas and then also gives people a little bit of a breather.
## Project status reports
Project status reports In this lesson, you are learning to identify and compare various types of tracking methods. This reading will cover project status reports and how you can use them to track and communicate common project elements in a snapshot. Key components of a project status report A project status report gives an overview of all of the project’s common elements and summarizes them in a snapshot.
It is an efficient communication tool to convey the latest status in one place for the team and stakeholders. Most status reports contain the following components: - Project name: The project name should be specific to the purpose of the project so that the overall goal of the project can be understood at-a-glance. - Date: You will create project status reports many times during the course of a project’s implementation phase.
Reports can be created weekly or monthly—it all depends on the stakeholders’ needs and pace of the project. Adding the date to each status report acts as a reference point for your audience and also creates a history log of the project’s status over time. - Summary: The summary condenses the project’s goals, schedule, highlights, and lowlights in one central place for easy stakeholder visibility.
Usually, the summary section will be followed by, or grouped with, the timeline summary and the overall project status. - Status: As you can imagine, status is a crucial piece. The status of the project illustrates your actual progress versus your planned progress. In project management, a common way to depict this is through RAG (red, amber, green), or Red-Yellow-Green, status reporting.
RAG follows a traffic light pattern to indicate progress and status. Red indicates that there are issues that need resolution and that the project may be delayed or go significantly over budget. Amber/Yellow means that there are potential issues with schedule or budget, but that the issues can likely be resolved with corrective actions. And green means the schedule and budget are doing fine and that the project is on track.
You can use RAG to indicate the overall project status, as well as milestone status. Every project team and stakeholder may have a slightly different perspective on what the colors mean and how urgent it is to escalate issues when they see an amber/yellow or red status, so it’s important to make sure everyone understands what the different color statuses mean for your project. - Milestones and tasks: A summary of the project’s major milestones thus far and current tasks helps the team and stakeholders easily visualize the progress of those elements.
In a project plan, you will typically depict the tasks and milestones as ‘not started,’ ‘in progress’ or ‘completed’ at an item-by-item level. But, in the project status report, it is common to summarize these items into two categories to better communicate the status. You’ll use key accomplishments to detail what has happened, and upcoming to detail what big milestones you will accomplish next.
- Issues: The issues include your project's current roadblocks and potential risks. Status reports are an important opportunity to set expectations with your stakeholders. If your project status is red or amber, you can flag what is preventing you from being where you planned to be. You can also use this opportunity to state your plan to get the project back to green, and ask for any resources or help you may need to do so.
You will learn more about communicating big risks and issues in the upcoming videos. Project status report types With those key elements in mind, you can format your report in a variety of ways depending on your audience and what you need to communicate. If you need to share a status report with your team for a project that contains multiple layers of complexity, it may be best to format the report in a spreadsheet in order to keep track of all the moving parts.
If you simply need to communicate updates to senior stakeholders, your status report may be best formatted as a slideshow, like the one below, containing only an overview of the most key points. Key takeaways To recap, project status reports are a powerful tool to: - Improve and simplify communication across the team. - Keep everyone, including key stakeholders, informed. - Request more resources and support (if needed).
- Create structure and transparency by recording the project status in a centralized place.
## Activity Exemplar: Build and explain a project status report
Activity Exemplar: Build and explain a project status report Here is a completed exemplar along with an explanation of how the exemplar fulfills the expectations for the activity. Completed Exemplar To view the exemplar for this course item, click the link below and select “Use Template.” Link to exemplar: Project status report OR If you don’t have a Google account, you can download the exemplar directly from the attachment below.Activity Exemplar Status report.xlsx Assessment of Exemplar Compare the exemplar to your completed project status report. Review your work using each of the criteria in the exemplar.
What did you do well? Where can you improve? Use your answers to these questions to guide you as you continue to progress through the course. Let’s review each section of the project status report: - The milestone “purchased and installed new software to keep track of incoming orders” was completed on June 15 by the IT Specialist. The report notes that the installation took three days longer than expected.
- The milestone “begin sending test batches of Plant Pals orders to customers” was completed on June 21 by the Fulfillment Director. The report notes that the number of orders exceeded Office Green’s targets by 15%. - The upcoming milestone “send the first batch customers an e-newsletter with a tutorial on caring for their plants” should be completed by July 7 by the Customer Service Manager.
The report notes that the newsletter must follow Office Green’s brand design guidelines. - The upcoming milestone “hit 95% of delivery dates on time” should be completed by July 19 by the Fulfillment Director. The report notes that the error rate should be under 5%. - The issue of “10% of the plants were not properly potted” results in profit loss, customer complaints, and budget issues.
The Warehouse Operations Manager is responsible for evaluating and adjusting the plant potting process. - The issue of “the customer service team receiving only 30% of requests and complaints” results in customer dissatisfaction. The IT Specialist is responsible for fixing problems with the new customer service software. - The issue of “the current delivery completion rate is only 80%” resulted in cancelled subscriptions.
The HR Specialist is responsible for hiring and training more delivery drivers. - The report includes an amber RAG status, since the project issues can be managed through minor changes.
## Why risks and changes occur
# Why risks and changes occur Welcome back. In an earlier video, we learned about how to identify risks when planning projects. In this module, we'll learn why risks and changes might occur during a project and how that can impact your project's scope. You may remember that a risk is a potential event that might occur and could impact your project. When you think about risks in the context of project management, you'll think about them as hypothetical.
In other words, these might not be events that will definitely happen, but because there's a possibility that they could happen, it's your responsibility as a project manager to identify and plan for those risks. Let's revisit some examples of risks. A project risk might be a contractor missing a deadline, or introducing a tool that may lead to communication breakdown within your team, or unexpected, additional work because of an unforeseen policy being put in place.
When any risk occurs, the consequence is a change to the project plan. A change is anything that alters or impacts the tasks, structures, or processes within a project. Changes are typically unexpected. More often than not, they have a negative impact on the project, and you'll have to learn to navigate that. But sometimes, and I'm placing a heavy emphasis on sometimes, changes can have a positive impact.
Changes can encompass any variance from the original project plan in regards to the triple constraint. This may entail changing priorities and scope, budget and resources, or changes to the project timeline. We'll discuss how the internal and external dependencies of a project impact each other and bring about change. Let's go through a few types of changes that can affect your project.
Some examples of changes may include new or changing dependencies. Dependencies are tasks, activities, or milestones that are reliant on one another. So if one task isn't completed on time, it may put your other tasks behind. You might be in charge of renovations on a home where there are dependencies. In a bathroom remodel, for instance, a new sink cannot be installed until the vanity and plumbing are in place.
Next, is changing priorities. The scope of the remodel changes if your client's in-laws suddenly have to move in, and you have to move up planned work on the spare bedroom before completing the bathroom remodel. Next up, the capacity and people available could change. Maybe you have to replace the plumber because you had issues on the job site. Another type of change could include a new limitation on your budget or resources.
For example, you need to reduce design costs in the new bathroom by 10 percent because your quotes for electrical work come in higher than expected. Another change could be scope creep. Scope creep is when changes, growth, and other factors affect the project scope. For instance, your clients are so happy with the tile in the new bathroom that they'd like to replace the tile in all of their bathrooms.
Finally, force majeure. This is another change that could occur due to a national or international crisis. If you aren't familiar with this term, it means an unforeseen circumstance that prevents someone from fulfilling the contract due to a major crisis. Force majeure is pretty uncommon. But for instance, if a union goes on strike, certain vendors won't be able to fulfill their contracts.
If there's a pandemic, all production on your new product might be halted. Changes should be measured against the baseline estimates of scope, budget, and time allotted for your project, given the original requirements. Be mindful that when you change any one of those things, there may be knock-on effects which could be positive or negative. For instance, your clients may believe they have beautiful hardwood floors hiding underneath old living room carpet and want to pull up the old carpet and use the original hardwood floors underneath.
You, the project manager on this particular construction job—you've budgeted to have the carpet removed and the old floors sanded and stained. Bad news. You pull up the carpet and find the floors are in bad shape and rotting. They'll need to be replaced or repaired, which could be costly, so your timeline and budget are likely to take a hit. When it comes to who takes on the responsibility of managing the changing scope, it'll be you—the project manager.
But depending on the project, you probably won't do it alone. In order to properly manage changes, you'll want to refer to documents like your Statement of Work and the RACI chart. But you might also have to create some new documentation. You'll want to create or familiarize yourself with the processes for requesting changes for your team or organization. These processes might include a change request form.
Let's discuss change request forms. You and your stakeholders will use these forms in order to stay on top of, and adequately manage, any changes. Since a lot of people with different roles on the project can fill out these forms, it's important for the forms to be self-explanatory and very thorough. In the provided template, which uses a 2-by-10 table, you'll need to include information in the cells, such as: the project name, the discussion owner, who's taking the lead on this discussion from the team, discussion type.
You'll want to let your audience know if you'll be discussing a risk, opportunity, or anything else. You'll want to identify the teams involved and the expected outcome of the discussion, which might be a change in priorities, schedule change, or an official call on how to proceed with an issue. Add the target date for discussion, and identify which milestones or goals might be impacted.
Provide a short description of the current situation, the change, and any difference you expect to make to the plan of record, like a snapshot of the before and after. Then go into in-depth proposal for the necessary changes and address any trade-offs. Finally, provide any background information so that everyone shares the same context. You can also refer to your statement of work, or SOW, for more information about who needs to be involved in that conversation.
If you find that one or more of your milestones are at risk of not being completed, then you'll need to get a customer sign-off before the scope, deadline, or budget are changed, and all parties involved need to be informed. Great work. We've reviewed how to define risk and know more about how to identify the reasons why risks and changes might occur during a project. And now we can explain the impact of increasing a project scope.
In the next video, we're going to discuss the role dependencies play and how to properly manage them. We'll meet you there.
## Identifying and tracking dependencies
# Identifying and tracking dependencies So we've covered risks and how they affect a project, but we haven't fully discussed dependencies—arguably one of the biggest factors in a project. In this video, we'll discuss dependencies—both internal and external—how to identify and track them, as well as their importance. There are a few different types of dependencies, and we'll discuss a few examples of each one.
So what exactly are dependencies? Dependencies are the links that connect one project task to another, and as we mentioned, they're often the greatest source of risk to a project. Two or more project tasks may have a relationship with one another in which the completion of one task is reliant on the initiation of another task, and vice versa. Think of these tasks like a line of dominoes toppling each other over, one by one.
If one domino falls, it'll knock the next one over and so on and so on. For instance, a construction company may have a number of jobs across the city. Each project requires a foreman and a project manager to be chosen before the requirements, timeline, and budget get signed off and the crew is chosen. You wouldn't choose a crew and tell them to get to work before the work has been clearly scoped and the contracts were signed.
That's an example of an internal dependency, which describes the relationship between two tasks within the same project. External dependencies, on the other hand, refer to tasks that are reliant on outside factors, like regulatory agencies or other projects. For instance, if a construction company is scheduled to demolish a building site, they'll have to wait until their project is approved by the city.
External dependencies aren't always in the project manager's control, but it's important to be aware of them so that the project stays on track. Mandatory dependencies are tasks that are legally or contractually required. For instance, when that construction company finishes the demolition and starts the rebuild, they'll first have to pour a concrete foundation and then have it inspected by the city to ensure it meets their standards before the construction company can continue to build.
Lastly, discretionary dependencies are defined by the project team. These are dependencies that could occur on their own, but the team saw a need to make those dependencies reliant on one another. For instance, the construction company may be using concrete from a new supplier and want to run a test, pouring a portion of the foundation to get a better estimate of the total amount of product they'll need to complete the foundation, rather than buying too much or too little product up front.
The task of pouring a portion of the foundation comes first, because the team needed more information before making a decision. A project manager has to work diligently to incorporate dependency management. Dependency management is the process of managing all of these interrelated tasks and resources within the project to ensure that your overall project is completed successfully on time and in budget.
To pursue effective dependency management, there are four important steps that a project manager can take: proper identification, recording dependencies, continuous monitoring and control, and efficient communication. The first step is proper identification. A project manager will have to brainstorm all possible project dependencies with their team and categorize them accordingly.
Next step is recording dependencies. After all dependencies are identified, a risk register should be created. A risk register is a table or chart that contains your list of risks and dependencies. The risk register should include a description of the dependency, the date, and all activities or tasks that may be impacted by the dependency. Then, a project manager will want to maintain continuous monitoring and control.
This means you will want to schedule regular meetings to check in on the interrelated tasks, staying up-to-date on any progress being made and double checking for changes that will impact other tasks. Last step is efficient communication. Keeping the project team and stakeholders updated can help resolve dependencies and keep the project going strong. To recap, we just discussed how to define dependencies, both internal and external, and we learned the importance of managing and tracking dependencies.
We also discussed the importance of clearly defining dependencies at the project outset, like in our foundation example, and learned about dependency management. In the next video, we'll give you concrete techniques to manage the risks in your project. I'll meet you there.
## Techniques to help manage risks
# Techniques to help manage risks Earlier we talked at length about identifying and managing risks. Risk management is absolutely critical to a project success. So in this video, we'll introduce additional techniques for managing risks. Let's start with a reminder of the definition of risk management: Risk management is the process of identifying potential risks and issues which could impact a project, then evaluating and applying steps to address the effects of the identified risks and issues.
One way to manage risks, and hopefully, prevent any risks from materializing is to focus on managing the changes and dependencies, as well as any scope creep in your project. If you can manage those two things, both changes and dependencies and scope creep, other types of risks become much easier to manage. If your dependencies are met on time, your team is less likely to fall behind schedule.
If your scope is tightly-managed, you're less likely to incur changes to your budget or be forced to extend your timeline. Brainstorming with your team is one of the most effective techniques for identifying risks in a project. Your teammates likely bring skills and experience from previous projects, which can help suss out similarities and keep you from repeating any issues. As we brainstorm with our team, it's best to create a risk register.
As a refresher, a risk register is a table or chart that contains your team's list of risks. You want to pose questions to your team, like what could improve the outcome of the project, or what could hurt or hinder it? You'll list them all as if/then statements. For example, if a given event happens, then here's how the project is impacted. To help prioritize risks within your risk register, you can calculate your risk exposure.
Risk exposure is a way to measure the potential future loss resulting from a specific activity or event. A good method to calculate risk exposure is to build a matrix like this one. When building out your matrix, you'll use two variables: risk impact and probability. Write "risk impact" at the top, horizontal axis, and write "probability" on the side, vertical axis. Mark high, medium, and low along each axis as well, across the top from left to right and down the side from top to bottom, because that's how you're going to chart risk exposure.
Add each risk to the chart at the cross section of the impact the risk might have on your project and probability or likelihood of the risk coming to pass. This is one technique, but whatever strategy you use to examine your risk exposure, your risks will need to be prioritized so that you know and your team knows which ones to give immediate attention to. For anything that has a high impact on your project, even if it has a low probability of occurring, make sure to have a mitigation plan in place.
How will you handle this risk if it actually materializes? While a risk register is a great tool, it's still likely that some unforeseen risk will arise. It's almost impossible to account for every single risk over the course of a project. That's where the ROAM technique can help. The ROAM technique—which stands for resolved, owned, accepted, and mitigated—is used to help manage actions after risks arise.
Once a risk has materialized, you need to decide what to do with it. If a risk has been eliminated and will not be a problem, it goes into your "resolved" category. If you give a team member ownership over a certain risk and entrust them to handle it, that risk goes into the "owned" category and is monitored through to completion. If the risk has been "accepted," it has been agreed that nothing will be done about it.
Finally, if some action has been taken such that the risk has been mitigated, either reducing the likelihood of it occurring or reducing the impact to the project, it goes into the "mitigated" category. After each risk is placed into a category, the team will discuss each risk and decide which should be prioritized. Awesome. Now you've learned a bit more about how to differentiate risks and issues, as well as some new techniques to manage various risks.
Next, we'll learn about how to share these risks with your stakeholders and a technique called escalation. Sound intriguing? Head to the next video to learn more.
## Case study: Using risk management tools
Case study: Using risk management tools Thus far, you have learned that risk management—the process of identifying, evaluating, and addressing potential risks and issues that could impact a project—is a core part of a project manager's role. You also learned about techniques to identify potential risks and address their effects, including creating risk registers and building mitigation plans. In the following case study, we will imagine how a project manager might utilize these tools.
The project: Paw Snacks Puppy Treats Paw Snacks is an online retailer of tasty and nutritious pet treats. Over the course of three years, the business has grown from a small startup to a 350-person organization. Paw Snacks wants to expand its offerings even further by adding a new line of treats for puppies. The issue Six weeks before the new product line is scheduled to debut, Naja, the project manager leading the launch, receives a frantic phone call from a manager at the commercial bakery hired to produce the treats.
The bakery manager informs Naja that the bone-shaped cookie cutters required to shape the treats have not yet arrived. Naja knows that baking needs to start the following day in order to stay on schedule for the launch. Naja thanks the bakery manager for the warning and asks her teammate, Abe, to call the cookie cutter manufacturer to check on the status of their order. Abe learns that the order is delayed due to a product shortage and that the cookie cutters are now expected to arrive at the bakery two days after the original expected delivery date.
Naja recognizes that this delay threatens her team’s ability to launch their product on time. Even worse, her team doesn’t have the option to push the launch date, since the Paw Snacks marketing team has already purchased nonrefundable advertising placements for the day of the launch. Luckily, Naja and her team are already prepared for an issue like this one. Planning for risks ahead of time Months earlier, long before the team started work on the project, Naja and her team brainstormed potential risks that could impact the project.
They created a risk register, a table or chart that contains a list of risks and is often paired with a probability and impact matrix. During the process, the team determined that a delay in the cookie cutter order had a medium probability of occurring and would result in a high impact on the project. Naja added the risk to the risk register and assigned Abe to create a mitigation plan, which outlines steps to decrease the chances of a risk occurring or decrease the impact of a risk if it does occur.
This plan would indicate how the team would handle an issue if it were to materialize. The mitigation plan was then approved by the project sponsor and other stakeholders. Managing the issue Now that the cookie cutter issue has occurred, Naja and Abe consult the mitigation plan for this particular risk. In this case, Abe identified two options for handling the risk: The first option is to work with the bakery to slightly increase the number of treats produced in order to make up for the two days they have lost due to the cookie cutter delay.
The second option is to place an order with a second bakery to help speed up the pace of production. Naja and Abe discuss the two plans and settle on option one to avoid the work of bringing in a second bakery. Before moving ahead with the plan, Naja and Abe meet to brainstorm potential risks associated with the new plan. Together, they determine that a smaller order of dog treats will likely have a minor—but manageable—impact on the organization’s projected growth for 2021.
They determine that the best course of action is to accept the risk to avoid delaying the project further. To ensure that the project stakeholders are aware of and comfortable with this change, Naja requests a meeting with her project sponsor to communicate the plan, outline the minor risk to projected growth, and recommend accepting the risk. The sponsor agrees and approves Naja’s new plan.
Naja tasks Abe with communicating the adjusted plan to the bakery manager. Though baking begins two days behind schedule, Naja’s new plan helps ensure that the team is prepared to launch the new line on time. Pro tip: While the term mitigation plan is used more often in project management, you may also hear the term contingency plan. These terms are often used interchangeably, but there are some key differences.
A mitigation plan is a planned risk response strategy. If a project manager is able to identify the potential known risks that impact any of the key project parameters (schedule, cost, or scope), they should make a plan to mitigate those risks early in the project. A contingency plan, on the other hand, is mostly related to funds the project manager keeps aside (outside of the planned project budget ) to support any of these known risk response plans if they go beyond the planned amount or to manage any unforeseen risks during execution.
Key takeaway In this case study, early risk management planning enabled Naja to act quickly when an issue presented itself at a pivotal time during the project execution phase. By consulting an existing mitigation plan and weighing two options for moving forward, Naja and Abe were able to make an informed decision about the best path forward. Naja also communicated the growth-related risks associated with the plan to the project sponsor in a timely fashion.
As you manage projects of your own, issues will come up again and again. When you do the heavy lifting of risk management planning before starting work on the project, you will be better equipped to respond to problems quickly.
## Activity Exemplar: Put together a ROAM analysis
Activity Exemplar: Put together a ROAM analysis Here is a completed exemplar along with an explanation of how the exemplar fulfills the expectations for the activity. Completed Exemplar To view the exemplar for this course item, click the link below and select “Use Template.” Link to exemplar: ROAM analysis OR If you don’t have a Google account, you can download the template directly from the attachment below.Activity Exemplar ROAM analysis.xlsx Assessment of Exemplar Compare the exemplar to your completed ROAM analysis. Review your work using each of the criteria in the exemplar.
What did you do well? Where can you improve? Use your answers to these questions to guide you as you continue to progress through the course. Let’s review each issue in the ROAM analysis: Issue 1: In response to the potting issue, you contacted the warehouse to evaluate and improve the potting process. After two weeks with no additional problems, you consider the matter resolved. Issue 2: Your team handled the customer complaints by listening to their issues and offering to send them free plants.
Most of the customers were satisfied with this solution. This issue is mitigated because you reduced its impact. Issue 3: You assign your IT Specialist to fix the issue with the customer service software. This issue is owned because the IT Specialist has not yet taken action, but there is a plan in place to take care of the issue. Issue 4: Some customers have called to cancel their subscriptions.
Your team offered them subscription promotions, but cannot get them to reconsider. Since a few cancellations will not have a major impact, you consider this issue accepted. Issue 5: To solve the delivery driver problem, you ask the HR Specialist to schedule a hiring day to hire and onboard more drivers. This issue is owned by the HR Specialist because they have not yet hired the drivers.
Issue 6: Your team reassessed delivery routes, which increased efficiency and reduced the number of late deliveries. This risk is mitigated because you have lessened its impact. Issue 7: Your Financial Analyst reassessed spending and found more money to offset the unexpected costs, so the issue is resolved.
## Escalating issues
# Escalating issues Hi again. In this video, we're going to learn about a common strategy used to resolve problems in a project. On top of several other tasks, it's a project manager's responsibility to resolve problems and remove constraints that are a detriment to the project's success. One way to do this is to escalate. Escalation is the process of enlisting the help of higher-level project leadership or management to remove an obstacle, clarify or reinforce priorities, and validate next steps.
Escalation may seem to have a negative connotation, but that's not the case in project management. In project management, escalation should be encouraged, used often, and even celebrated. Escalations are healthy and act as a checks and balances tool to make sure appropriate action is being taken. They can result in speedy decision-making, and generally, the quicker a problem is resolved, the better off a project will be.
Instead of going back and forth between two team members who can't agree, an objective third party might help make the call and reduce frustrations within the team. Finally, escalations encourage participation. Encouraging others to participate in solving or owning problems can promote trust and shared responsibility among teammates, which are signs of a healthy, functional team.
Before starting work on a project, the project manager, the team, and the project sponsor should establish escalation standards and practices. This means they'll specify who the issues will be raised to, how issues are raised, and the forum for discussion. A little upfront work will help escalations run smoothly when and if they're needed. So you know what an escalation is and when to set the framework for managing escalations, but how do you know when to escalate?
A project manager should escalate an issue at the first sign of critical problems in the project. Critical problems are issues that may cause a delay to a major project milestone, issues that cause budget overruns, issues that can result in the loss of a customer, and issues that push back the estimated project completion date. Basically, anything that will affect your triple constraint, time, budget, and scope is something that should be escalated.
Escalation is great for preventing two common issues within a project: trench wars and bad compromises. Trench wars occur when two peers or groups can't seem to come to an agreement, and neither party is willing to give in. This leads to a standstill of the project and will likely delay certain aspects of the project's progress. Typically, we think of compromises as a positive way to resolve issues, but there is such a thing as a bad compromise.
A bad compromise occurs when two parties settle on a so-called solution, but the end product still suffers. When it comes to compromising on important project goals, it's not productive for either party to settle simply because it's a means to an end. Yes, compromise while also keeping the larger project goals in mind and working towards those together. You may have to help your team or stakeholders make hard choices for the greater good.
So now we've defined escalation, how to use the triple constraints model when communicating to stakeholders and negotiating changes, and we learned about trench wars and bad compromises, which are two common issues on a project. In the next video, we'll explain some more techniques for communicating with your team, including timeouts and retrospectives. I'll meet you there.
## Communicating changes to the team
# Communicating changes to the team In the last video, we defined escalations and their benefits and went over when to execute them. In this video, we're going to cover how to communicate change to your project team. You've probably come to an understanding that effective communication leads to positive outcomes in every aspect of your life. The same is true for communicating changes in projects.
Communicating change to project team members and stakeholders isn't just a matter of keeping your tracking documents up to date. Even the smallest changes will be meaningful to someone on your team and should be communicated. It's also true that you'll need to tailor your communication tactics based on the subject matter and recipient. As a project manager, sometimes you're going to want to have a meeting with your whole team, while other times an email might suffice.
Personally, I prefer having a quick coffee or hallway chat with my teammates and then following up with an email, noting what we agreed upon. This is particularly useful when you need quick agreement or if the subject is a little sensitive. How will you know which communication tactic is appropriate? Ultimately, you'll have to use your own judgment, but here are some ways you can decide which route to take.
As a project manager, when communicating a small change that will affect an individual, it's a good idea to send an email. Be sure to avoid emotional topics or anything that needs to be discussed in depth. Just give them a heads up and set a meeting time. Weekly meetings may not be necessary, particularly if your agenda is short. If you set a meeting and then decide against it, you can either pivot to an email or move the topic to a different forum.
When there's a big change within your project that impacts more than one person and is likely to change the budget, deadline, or scope of the project, you'll probably want to have a team meeting. One useful tactic to keep in mind when navigating these changes in your project is called a timeout. A timeout means taking a moment away from the project in order to take a breath, regroup, and adjust the game plan.
A timeout may temporarily disrupt your momentum, but it may be absolutely necessary to set you up for success in the long run. You may want to take a timeout when the client wants to redefine the scope of the project or if team members get reassigned to other projects and you need a plan to backfill them. This timeout is a chance for the project team to evaluate the changes so they can adjust the plan as needed.
Throughout the process, you will want to hold meetings in order to discuss successes, setbacks, and possible future improvements to the project. These meetings are called retrospectives. Retrospectives are held throughout the project's life cycle. A retrospective focuses on identifying the contributing causes of an incident or pattern of incidents without blaming one individual. While conducting a retrospective, you should always assume that everyone has good intentions and did the right thing with the information they had, whether or not it worked out well in the end.
There's always a chance to learn and do better. As a project manager, it's important to identify effective techniques for communicating changes to an individual teammate or to your whole team. You now know a bit more about taking a timeout and the idea of a retrospective to have productive conversations about incidents that arise during your project, and we will discuss this more towards the end of the course.
All of these things will help you on your journey to become a successful project manager. Let's keep going.
## Writing an effective escalation email
Writing an effective escalation email In this lesson, you are learning how to communicate risks and changes to your team and stakeholders. In the previous video, you were introduced to escalation: the process of enlisting the help of higher level project leadership or management to remove an obstacle, clarify or reinforce priorities, and validate next steps. There are many ways to escalate a risk, and it is important to set escalation standards with your stakeholders before beginning work on a project.
In this reading, we will focus on the escalation email, and go over best practices for writing one. Escalation email best practices All projects—even those managed by experienced project managers—occasionally have problems. Your role as the project manager is to help resolve problems and remove barriers that prevent your team from making progress toward your goals. While many problems might be small enough to resolve within your core team, other problems—like a major change in your budget or timeline—may need to be brought to stakeholders for a final decision.
Detailing these problems, their potential impact, and the support you need in a clear and direct email to your audience can be an effective communication tool. Effective escalation emails: - Maintain a friendly tone - State your connection to the project - Explain the problem - Explain the consequences - Make a request Let’s discuss these five keys to writing a strong escalation email. Maintain a friendly tone When drafting an escalation email, you may feel tempted to get straight to the point, especially when dealing with a stressful and time-sensitive problem.
But keep in mind that it is important to address issues with grace. Consider opening your email with a simple show of goodwill, such as “I hope you’re doing well.” When describing the issue, aim for a blameless tone. Above all, keep the email friendly and professional. After all, you are asking for the recipient’s help. Be sure to close your email by thanking the recipient for their time.
State your connection to the project Introduce yourself early in the email if you have less familiarity with the project stakeholders. Be sure to clearly state your name, role, and relationship to the project. This helps the reader understand why you are reaching out. Keep your introduction brief and to the point—a single sentence should suffice. If you know the person on the receiving end of the escalation email, you can simply reinforce your responsibility on the project before getting straight to the problem.
Explain the problem Once you greet your recipient and briefly introduce yourself, explain the issue at hand. Clearly state the problem you need to solve. Provide enough context for the reader to understand the issue, but aim to keep your message as concise as possible. Avoid long, dense paragraphs that may obscure your message and tempt the reader to skim. Explain the consequences After explaining the problem, clearly outline the consequences.
Describe specifically how this issue is negatively impacting the project or how it has the potential to negatively impact the project later in the project timeline. Again, keep your explanation concise and your tone friendly. Propose a course of action and make a request This is the central piece of a strong escalation email. In this section, you propose a solution (or solutions) and state what you need from the recipient.
A thoughtful solution accompanied by a clear request lets the recipient know how they can help and moves you toward a resolution. Putting it all together Let’s see how these best practices come together to form a strong escalation email. In the scenario that prompts the email, Sayid, a project manager from a company that sells gift baskets, is having a quality control issue with one of the items in a line of holiday baskets.
If the issue is not rectified soon, the product launch will have to be delayed and the company will lose money. In the annotated email example below, Sayid explains the issue to his internal stakeholders and requests a meeting with them. Alternate text of email: To: knelson@graciousgiftbaskets.com, gabrielmendoza@graciousgiftbaskets.com [Your stakeholders] Subject: [Action required] Decision needed to make progress on Holiday Scents project Hi Karen and Gabriel, [Keep it friendly and state your connection to the project] I hope you are doing well.
As you may know, I have been managing our Holiday Scents product line, which is scheduled to launch in October. [Explain the problem] I would like to bring an issue to your attention. The baskets in this product line will include scented candles, and we placed an order with Candlemakers, Inc. for 5,000 candles to be delivered to the warehouse by Friday to prepare for our first customer shipment.
To date, we have received 3,000 of the 5,000 candles. Unfortunately, many of the candles we have received so far fail to meet our quality standards. The packaging is damaged, or the candles themselves are broken. [Explain the consequences] This puts our customer satisfaction rates at risk. Failure to meet the quality requirements for the candles by Friday will result in postponing the product launch by three weeks.
If this delay occurs, we will incur an additional cost of $20,000 because we will need to order a new shipment of candles and review the quality standards of each to ensure that they meet our contractual agreements. [Propose a course of action and make a request] I have sourced two backup suppliers that have five-star reviews and a track record of on-time deliveries. I propose we meet with them both right away so we can onboard one of them quickly.
That way, we can avoid major delays. Are you available for a meeting tomorrow to discuss options and come to an agreement on next steps? Please respond with the times that work best for you. Thank you in advance for your consideration and insight, Sayid End of email Key takeaway In this example, Sayid maintains a friendly tone, clearly explains the problem and its potential consequences, and makes a clear request of the recipients.
The email is also brief and to the point. To recap, effective escalation emails apply these five best practices: - Maintain a friendly tone - State your connection to the project - Explain the problem - Explain the consequences - Make a request Escalation is a useful skill for solving problems quickly, and sending a strong escalation email that applies these best practices can help get your team the help it needs.
## Wrap-up
# Wrap-up Congrats! You've reached the end of this section. We've covered some really important aspects of implementation, tracking, and quality, in this course. We discussed why the tracking process is essential to building confidence in your team and how important knowing the progress of a project is. To communicate this, you learned how to use various types of tracking methods, like Gantt charts, roadmaps, and burndown charts.
You also learned that roadmaps are suitable for tracking high-level milestones, Gantt charts are useful for projects with many dependencies, and burndown charts are better for more granular, task-oriented projects that are on a tight schedule. You learned which items to track using these charts, including costs, the status of key tasks, progress toward milestones, incoming action items, and important decisions. We explored risks and dependencies, including techniques like brainstorming to create risk registers, and we took you through the ROAM technique, which stands for resolved, owned, accepted, and mitigated.
You also learned about changes and dependencies and how they impact a project. We also discussed managing and communicating those risks, changes, and dependencies. Whew, that is a lot! Well done! Coming up, we'll take you through managing quality and continuous improvement. Meet you there.