Introduction: Eat That Frog
This is a wonderful time to be alive. There have never been more
possibilities and opportunities for you to achieve more of your goals than exist
today. As perhaps never before in human history, you are actually drowning in
options. In fact, there are so many good things that you can do that your ability
to decide among them may be the critical determinant of what you accomplish in
life.
If you are like most people today, you are overwhelmed with too much to do
and too little time. As you struggle to get caught up, new tasks and
responsibilities just keep rolling in, like the waves of the ocean. Because of this,
you will never be able to do everything you have to do. You will never be caught
up. You will always be behind in some of your tasks and responsibilities, and
probably in many of them.
The Need to Be Selective
For this reason, and perhaps more than ever before, your ability to select your
most important task at each moment, and then to get started on that task and to
get it done both quickly and well, will probably have more of an impact on your
success than any other quality or skill you can develop.
An average person who develops the habit of setting clear priorities and
getting important tasks completed quickly will run circles around a genius who
talks a lot and makes wonderful plans but who gets very little done.
The Truth about Frogs
It has been said that if the first thing you do each morning is to eat a live frog,
you can go through the day with the satisfaction of knowing that that is probably
the worst thing that is going to happen to you all day long.
Your “frog” is your biggest, most important task, the one you are most likely
Your “frog” is your biggest, most important task, the one you are most likely
to procrastinate on if you don’t do something about it. It is also the one task that
can have the greatest positive impact on your life and results at the moment.
The first rule of frog eating is this: If you have to eat two frogs, eat the ugliest
one first.
This is another way of saying that if you have two important tasks before you,
start with the biggest, hardest, and most important task first. Discipline yourself
to begin immediately and then to persist until the task is complete before you go
on to something else.
Think of this as a test. Treat it like a personal challenge. Resist the temptation
to start with the easier task. Continually remind yourself that one of the most
important decisions you make each day is what you will do immediately and
what you will do later, if you do it at all.
The second rule of frog eating is this: If you have to eat a live frog at all, it
doesn’t pay to sit and look at it for very long.
The key to reaching high levels of performance and productivity is to develop
the lifelong habit of tackling your major task first thing each morning. You must
develop the routine of “eating your frog” before you do anything else and
without taking too much time to think about it.
Take Action Immediately
In study after study of men and women who get paid more and promoted faster,
the quality of “action orientation” stands out as the most observable and
consistent behavior they demonstrate in everything they do. Successful, effective
people are those who launch directly into their major tasks and then discipline
themselves to work steadily and single-mindedly until those tasks are complete.
“Failure to execute” is one of the biggest problems in organizations today.
Many people confuse activity with accomplishment. They talk continually, hold
endless meetings, and make wonderful plans, but in the final analysis, no one
does the job and gets the results required.
Develop the Habits of Success
Your success in life and work will be determined by the kinds of habits that you
develop over time. The habit of setting priorities, overcoming procrastination,
and getting on with your most important task is a mental and physical skill. As
such, this habit is learnable through practice and repetition, over and over again,
until it locks into your subconscious mind and becomes a permanent part of your
behavior. Once it becomes a habit, it becomes both automatic and easy to do.
This habit of starting and completing important tasks has an immediate and
continuous payoff. You are designed mentally and emotionally in such a way
that task completion gives you a positive feeling. It makes you happy. It makes
you feel like a winner.
Whenever you complete a task of any size or importance, you feel a surge of
energy, enthusiasm, and self-esteem. The more important the completed task, the
happier, more confident, and more powerful you feel about yourself and your
world.
The completion of an important task triggers the release of endorphins in
your brain. These endorphins give you a natural “high.” The endorphin rush that
follows successful completion of any task makes you feel more positive,
personable, creative, and confident.
Develop a Positive Addiction
Here is one of the most important of the so-called secrets of success. You can
actually develop a “positive addiction” to endorphins and to the feeling of
enhanced clarity, confidence, and competence that they trigger. When you
develop this addiction, you will, at an unconscious level, begin to organize your
life in such a way that you are continually starting and completing ever more
important tasks and projects. You will actually become addicted, in a very
positive sense, to success and contribution.
One of the keys to your living a wonderful life, having a successful career,
and feeling terrific about yourself is to develop the habit of starting and finishing
important jobs. When you do, this behavior will take on a power of its own and
you’ll find it easier to complete important tasks than not to complete them.
No Shortcuts
You remember the story of the man who stops a musician on a street in New
York and asks how he can get to Carnegie Hall. The musician replies, “Practice,
man, practice.”
Practice is the key to mastering any skill. Fortunately, your mind is like a
Practice is the key to mastering any skill. Fortunately, your mind is like a
muscle. It grows stronger and more capable with use. With practice, you can
learn any behavior or develop any habit that you consider either desirable or
necessary.
The Three Ds of New Habit Formation
You need three key qualities to develop the habits of focus and concentration,
which are all learnable. They are decision, discipline, and determination.
First, make a decision to develop the habit of task completion. Second,
discipline yourself to practice the principles you are about to learn over and over
until they become automatic. And third, back everything you do with
determination until the habit is locked in and becomes a permanent part of your
personality.
Visualize Yourself as You Want to Be
There is a special way that you can accelerate your progress toward becoming
the highly productive, effective, efficient person that you want to be. It consists
of your thinking continually about the rewards and benefits of being an action-
oriented, fast-moving, and focused person. See yourself as the kind of person
who gets important jobs done quickly and well on a consistent basis.
Your mental picture of yourself has a powerful effect on your behavior.
Visualize yourself as the person you in–tend to be in the future. Your self-image,
the way you see yourself on the inside, largely determines your performance on
the outside. All improvements in your outer life begin with improvements on the
inside, in your mental pictures.
You have a virtually unlimited ability to learn and develop new skills, habits,
and abilities. When you train yourself, through repetition and practice, to
overcome procrastination and get your most important tasks completed quickly,
you will move onto the fast track in your life and career and step on the
accelerator of your potential.
Eat That Frog!