SECTION THREE
Turning Connections
into Compatriots
CHAPTER 1 8
Health, Wealth, and Children
What do you really want? Side by side, those five words may
be the most universally resonant in the English language.
As I discussed in the chapter "What's Your Mission?" the
answer to "What do you really want?" determines all that you do
and all the people who help you accomplish it. It provides the
blueprint for all your efforts to reach out and connect with others.
Likewise, when you understand someone else's mission, you hold
the key to opening the door to what matters most to them. Know
ing that will help you create deep, long-lasting bonds.
In my initial conversation with someone I'm just getting to
know, whether it's a new men tee or simply a new business contact,
I try to find out what motivations drive that person. It often
comes down to one of three things: making money, finding love,
or changing the world. You laugh—most people do when con
fronted with the reality of their deepest desires.
Get comfortable with that reality. Learning to become a con
nector means in some sense learning to become an armchair ther
apist. As you continue down this path, you'll become a keen
observer of the human psyche. You'll have to learn what makes
people tick and how best to satisfy whatever tick that may be. It
means calling something BS when you see people being less than
honest with themselves.
The most successful relationship builders are, indeed, a nifty
amalgam of financial guru, sex therapist, and all-around do-
gooder.
Connecting is a philosophy of life, a worldview. Its guiding princi
ple is that people, all people, every person you meet, is an oppor
tunity to help and be helped. Why do I place so much importance
on mutual dependence? For starters, because, as a matter of neces
sity, we are all social beings. Our strength comes from what we do
and know cumulatively. The fact is, no one gets ahead in this
world without a lot of help.
Eliminating things like intimidation and manipulation, there
is only one way to get anybody to do anything. Do you know what
it is?
This is far from a trivial question. Business is, after all, the abil
ity to motivate a group of individuals to move an idea from con
cept to reality; to take a theory and make it a practice; to gain the
buy-in of your employees and colleagues; to encourage others to
execute your plans.
If you're still not sure what the answer is, take heart; many
people don't. There are hundreds of new books published each
year grappling with how to engender loyalty and motivation.
Most arrive at the wrong answer.
They get it wrong because of the assumptions they make. It's in
vogue for people to exclaim: Everything is new! Everything is dif
ferent! Business has changed! The answers, people suggest, must
be found in technology or new forms of leadership or funky orga
nizational theories. But is there anything really new or different
about people? Not really.
The principles of how to deal with other people are the ones
Dale Carnegie espoused over sixty years ago that have proven to
be universal and timeless.
The only way to get people to do anything is to recognize their
importance and thereby make them feel important. Every per
son's deepest lifelong desire is to be significant and to be recog
nized.
What better way is there to show appreciation and to lavish
praise on others than to take an interest in who they are and what
their mission is?
There is an added nuance to discovering what matters to peo
ple. Helping someone accomplish his or her deepest desires is crit
ical not only to forming a bond with someone but to keeping that
bond strong and growing. Loyalty may be the forgotten virtue of
the modern age, but it remains the hallmark of any strong rela
tionship and a value many companies are working hard to bring
into their day-to-day practices.
Loyalty, to me, means staying true to someone (or something,
like a brand or a customer segment) through thick and thin. Loy
alty is a marathon rather than a sprint. As any good brand man
ager knows, you don't win customer loyalty quickly. It has to be
earned. How?
Let me tell you a story about Michael Milken: yes, the financial
and deal-making guru but also a man who is a philanthropist and
deeply insightful human behaviorist. Through Entertainment
Media Ventures (EMV), Mike was an investor in the start-up com
pany I joined after Starwood. And, during my recruitment as
CEO, I made it clear to him and my friend Sandy Climan, who led
EMV, that a big motivation of taking the job would be to learn
from Mike while running the company. I had already gotten to
know Mike independently a few years back while acting as an
advisor to DuPont, when the company was starting a consumer
soy-milk joint venture. Mike was someone I had always wanted to
meet—one of my early aspirational contacts. I had discovered
through some articles I had read about him that he had a great
deal of interest in soy and its curative effects. He had suffered a
bout with prostate cancer, which he turned into a passion for
health care and the importance of preventative medicine. To
Mike, diet was an integral component in that mix, and it became
a personal and philanthropic passion.
From the beginning of my tenure as CEO, I sought to build the
company and further my relationship with Mike. He, in turn, took
me under his wing and opened his world to me.
If he was going to New York for one of his many CapCure
fundraisers, which support scientific research to find cures for
prostate cancer, or traveling to someplace to give out recognition
and money to exceptional teachers through the Milken Family
Foundation, I would try to catch a ride. My only goal was to watch
how he worked and perhaps glean a few insights in the process. I
made it a point to identify customers or prospects at whatever
destination city he was going to, so it was time well spent for YaYa
as well.
Most of the time, we would sit quietly working. He would plow
through one of the ten bags of reading he lugs with him wherever
he goes, and I, of course, would be pounding away on my com
puter, e-mailing and connecting with abandon for YaYa revenue
generation and business development. There was much to be
learned in simply watching what he read and how he thought or
reflected.
On one trip in particular, Mike and I began to talk about
people's passions, what really mattered to people. It was then that
I received profound insight about people and loyalty. You see,
Mike, in addition to having a brilliant quantitative mind, is also a
relationship artist.
I have seen him spend hours talking to people you'd never
expect him to take an interest in: secretaries, the very old and the
very young, the powerful and the powerless. He loves people, their
stories, and how they view the world. When I mentioned that to
him, I was reminded of what Ralph Waldo Emerson once said:
"Every man I meet is my superior in some way. In that, I learn of
him." Everyone had something to teach him.
This focus on people was the reason so many of them showed
so much loyalty to him. I feel that same loyalty. I asked how so
many people became so invested in their relationship with him.
What did he know that others didn't? Mike paused for a moment,
as he does when he particularly likes (or dislikes) a question. Then
he smiled.
"Keith," he said, "there are three things in this world that
engender deep emotional bonds between people. They are health,
wealth, and children."
There are a lot of things we can do for other people: give good
advice, help them wash their car, or help them move. But health,
wealth, and children affect us in ways other acts of kindness
do not.
When you help someone through a health issue, positively
impact someone's personal wealth, or take a sincere interest in
their children, you engender life-bonding loyalty.
Mike's experience was, in fact, backed by research. Psychologist
Abraham Maslow created a theory outlining human beings' hier
archy of needs. We all have the same needs, Maslow believed, and
our more basic needs must be satisfied before our higher needs
can be addressed.
The highest human need, said Maslow, is for self-actualization—
the desire to become the best you can be. Dale Carnegie astutely
recognized this. But Maslow argues we can't attend to our highest
needs until we attend to those at the bottom of the pyramid, like
the necessities of subsistence, security, and sex. It is within this
lower group—where health, wealth, and children reside—that
Mike was saying loyalty is created. In addressing those three
fundamental issues, you accomplish two things: 1) You help
someone fulfill those needs they most need met, and 2) You allow
them the opportunity to move up the pyramid of needs to tackle
some of their higher desires.
I reflected on my own experience and found he was absolutely
right.
Recently, a friend of mine was diagnosed with prostate cancer.
Because of my relationship with the CapCure foundation, I knew
the lead doctor there. I gave him a call to see if he could spend
some time with my friend. Another friend, Mehmet Oz, the wun-
derkind who directs the Cardiovascular Institute at Columbia
University and is a founder and director of the Complementary
Medicine Program at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, is always
taking the calls of people I send his way.
I know intimately how in a time of anxiety a reassuring expert
is worth all the wealth in the world. Throughout my father's
heart-related illness, a family friend named Arlene Treskovich,
who worked for one of the best heart doctors in Pittsburgh, gave
us access to medical advice few blue-collar Pittsburgh families can
afford. She was just doing what she was taught; her mother, Marge,
had worked at the Latrobe Hospital and used to make sure that
any member of our family or friends of our family who were hos
pitalized were treated like royalty, even if it was just an extra Jell-O
from the kitchen when it was closed. To this day, I would do any
thing Arlene asked of me.
Sometimes, all it requires is taking an interest and providing
emotional support. Let me give you an example. Robin Richards
was the founding president of music portal MP3.com and built
one of the highest-profile Internet companies in the world. He
skillfully navigated MP3.com through a very difficult period
before selling it to Vivendi Universal, which subsequently hired
him as a key executive. I met Robin around this time because he
was leading a negotiation to buy our company.
The deal ultimately fell through, but during the process, I
learned Robin had a young child who had suffered from a terrible
form of cancer. When he shared this deeply painful and private
piece of information over dinner with me, the dynamics that so
often attend a negotiation flew out the window. We discussed our
shared experiences and I introduced him to Mike, who was
equally passionate about finding a cure for this form of cancer.
Robin and I are still good friends to this day, and I know we would
both bend over backward for the other.
Have you helped someone lose weight by passing on a good
diet? Have you found a particular vitamin or supplement that has
helped you and passed it on to others? These may seem like little
things. But with these three issues, health and diet included, the
little things mean everything.
When it came to wealth, I thought of the many men and women
whom I've helped find jobs. While it's not the same as making
someone millions through innovative financing instruments, as
Mike had done for many people, a job significantly altered these
friends' economic situation. If someone I know is looking for a job,
I reach out through my network for leads. If they've already found
a job they're interested in, I call the decision maker. Sometimes I'll
simply help someone revise his or her resume, or act as a reference.
Whatever I can do. And I do the same for businesses. For the restau
rants I frequent, for example, I make it my mission to send as much
business their way as possible. I work hard to funnel customers to
all my contacts who are consultants, vendors, and suppliers of all
stripes. I know they are good, I trust them, and I want others to ben
efit from their expertise as well.
People's children mean everything to them. I take it upon
myself to mentor kids. It's fun, it's helpful, and teaching is the
finest method I know for learning. The loyalty I've gained from
placing a person's child in an internship, whether at my company
or a friend's company, is immeasurable.
Take my experience with Jack Valenti, the former Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer of the Motion Picture Association.
Texas born, Harvard educated, Valenti has led several lives: a
wartime bomber pilot, advertising agency founder, political con
sultant, White House Special Assistant, and movie industry leader.
He knows everyone; more important, every one who knows him
has loads of respect for the man (in an industry not keen on dol
ing out respect to anyone).
Valenti had been an aspirational contact of mine for some
time. I never sought him out, but he was somebody I knew would
be very interesting, a hardworking Italian guy who worked his way
up from nothing. I figured we had plenty in common.
Our first encounter was pure serendipity. I attended a lunch
eon for cabinet members at the Democratic National Convention
in Los Angeles during President Clinton's last year of office. I spot
ted Jack among the attendees. When we all sat down for lunch, I
made sure he and I were sitting next to each other.
Our conversation that afternoon was good, entertaining, and
polite. I had no mission or purpose. I hoped it might, someday,
form the basis for something more substantive.
Not long after, a friend called me, knowing I was passionate
about mentoring. "You know, Jack Valenti's son is looking for
work in your industry. You might want to meet with him and give
him some advice."
Jack's son is a very bright chip off the old block, both charm
ing and smart. I gave him some advice, introduced him to some
people within the industry that he should know, and that was it.
Several months later, at the Yale CEO conference, I saw Jack
again.
"Jack," I said, "I'm sure you don't remember me. There's no
reason you should. We sat together for lunch once at a Democra
tic convention. But I met with your son a few months ago to give
him some career advice. I was wondering how he is doing?"
Jack dropped everything he was doing and couldn't have been
more interested. He peppered me with questions about his son
and what the best tack was to enter my industry.
I followed up our encounter a day later with a dinner invita
tion, along with an array of political and entertainment honchos
he could meet.
"Sure, I'd love to come to dinner if my schedule allows," he told
me. "But more important, I'd like to get together for lunch with
you, me, and my son."
Jack probably wasn't that interested in my dinner invitation.
Who knows? But he was interested in the welfare of his son. Jack
regards my dinner invitations with a lot more excitement than he
would have if I had not had the chance to give his son some sim
ple and sound advice.
Too many people think an invitation alone is enough to engen
der loyalty. Back in my days at Deloitte, and I see it today in my
consulting practice, a lot of people felt that taking clients and
prospects out to a fancy dinner, a ballgame, or a show was the way
to build loyalty. I've fallen into that trap myself. In the beginning
of a relationship, those kinds of outings are merely forums that
allow you to connect strongly enough with the other person to
help them address the issues that matter to them most. However,
we've encouraged some of our biggest Fortune 100 clients to
begin to invite their clients and prospects into their executives'
homes to have dinner, meet the family, and understand how they
can really help their clients as individuals.
But remember, if you're going to deal with people's most
important issues, give those issues the commitment that they
deserve. If not, your best intentions will backfire. Hell hath no
fury like a person for whom you've promised the most intimate of
help and delivered none.
Can you walk the talk? It's easy for someone to say, "I care about
people. I believe in helping and being helped. I believe that helping
people become healthy or make money or raise successful children
is paramount in life." Many people say those things—but then you
see their actions, you hear about them from their own networks,
and you discover they really don't believe any of it. You can be sure
your network will broadcast your true colors very quickly and with
lasting effects to all its members.
Where do you start? You start with the philosophy, the world-
view, that every human is an opportunity to help and be helped.
The rest—whether it means helping with someone's health, wealth,
children, or any other unsatisfied desires—follows from that.