SECTION TWO
The Skill Set
CHAPTER 7
Do Your Homework
Spectacular achievement is always preceded by spectacular
preparation.
—ROBERT H. SCHULLER
Whom you meet, how you meet them, and what they think
of you afterward should not be left to chance. As Winston
Churchill would tell us, preparation is—if not the key to genius—
then at least the key to sounding like a genius.
Before I meet with any new people I've been thinking of intro
ducing myself to, I research who they are and what their business
is. I find out what's important to them: their hobbies, challenges,
goals—inside their business and out. Before the meeting, I gener
ally prepare, or have my assistant prepare, a one-page synopsis on
the person I'm about to meet. The only criterion for what should
be included is that I want to know what this person is like as a
human being, what he or she feels strongly about, and what his or
her proudest achievements are.
Sure, you should also be up-to-date on what's happening
within the company of a person you want to establish a relation
ship with. Did the person have a good or bad quarter? Do they
have a new product? Trust me, all people naturally care, generally
above and beyond anything else, about what it is they do. If you
are informed enough to step comfortably into their world and talk
knowledgeably, their appreciation will be tangible. As William
James wrote: "The deepest principle in human nature is the crav
ing to be appreciated."
These days, doing such research is easy. Here are a few places to
start:
• The Internet. Be sure to check out the company's Web site. Use
search engines, like Google, to check a person's affiliations.
Going to a meeting without Googling someone is unacceptable.
• The public library, where you'll find books, periodicals, maga
zines, trade journals, etc. Check for articles written by or about
the people you intend to meet. If there aren't any, read up on
the person's industry or type of job. Most of this can be found
online, too.
• Literature from the company's public relations department.
Call and explain that you have a scheduled meeting and would
like some background information.
• Annual reports. They'll give you a good idea of where a com
pany is headed and what challenges and opportunities lie
ahead.
Setting out to know someone inevitably means understanding
what their problems or needs are. At work, it may be their product
line. But as you talk with the person, you'll also find out that per
haps their kids are hoping to land an internship, that they them
selves have health issues, or they just want to cut strokes off their
golf game. The point is, you have to reach beyond the abstract and
get to someone as an individual. Find a way to become part of
those things that are of most interest to them, and you will have
found a way to become part of their life.
Recently, I took part in a roundtable discussion sponsored by
the Milken Institute's Global Conference in Los Angeles, an annual
three-day gathering that brings together the world's top thinkers
and CEOs to work over global problems. There were fifteen partic
ipants, each one an executive of a company far bigger than my own.
In many settings, I probably wouldn't have been rubbing
elbows with them, but because I had helped organize the confer
ence (always an advantage), I was invited to participate.
The events were planned with a CEO's tight schedule in mind.
There was a brief mixer before the event to allow the participants
to mingle and get to know one another. Then a panel discussion
on the future of marketing, given the challenges facing big brands.
Afterward, a short dinner.
In other words, there was about a three-hour window of
opportunity where I could hope to establish a foundation for one
or two relationships.
A successful conference's agenda is always created to maximize
the participants' time. My own goal at such conferences is to max
imize the brief windows of opportunity I might get to become
intimate with other interesting people I haven't met before.
Food, I find, has a unique ability to facilitate conversation.
People are usually open, even eager, to be amused while eating.
Meals at conventions, however, are problematic. They're rushed,
frenetic affairs that call for gracious, but unobtrusive, small talk.
You're never sure where you'll end up sitting. And among
strangers, it's usually difficult to focus beyond the people sitting
either to your left or right.
And during the panel, people are focused on their own presen
tations.
That left the mixer. During mixers, I like to hang out near the
bar. Virtually everyone gets a drink at some point. Throughout the
day, I had also scouted out which rooms the people I wanted to
meet were holding court in for the day, and arranged my schedule
so I could be there as they were walking in or out. It sounds a bit
manipulative, but really, it's just putting yourself in the right posi
tion at the right time.
The challenge in such circumstances, as it is in every conversa
tion, is to try to transcend the trivialities of polite chitchat. I had
gotten to know the lead organizer of the event during the preced
ing months, and based on casual conversation I generally knew
who was coming—not privileged information but useful in my
preparation. My office compiled simple bios of the VIPs who were
coming in case I ended up meeting them or sitting next to them.
My assistant prepared a few one-pagers on the one or two individ
uals I especially wanted to meet.
This is all part of what I call just doing your homework. That
alone, however, is not enough. The idea is to find a point of com
mon ground that is deeper and richer than what can be discovered
in a serendipitous encounter. Armed with knowledge about a per
son's passions, needs, or interests, you can do more than connect;
you'll have an opportunity to bond and impress.
A master politician like Winston Churchill planned his public
encounters in the same way. Churchill today is known as an ora
tory genius, master of the art of repartee—the kind of fantastic
dinner guest who captures everyone's undivided attention. What
is less known—but which Churchill acknowledged in his own
writing—is the blood, sweat, and tears of preparation that went
into the making of a single sentence or the delivery of a clever
joke. Churchill realized the power of knowing his audience and
knowing how to push their buttons.
So how did I do?
I discovered that one of the CEOs, John Pepper, was also a fel
low graduate of Yale. I had admired him since I was an undergrad
and had seen him speak on campus. The former CEO of Procter
& Gamble, Pepper was committed to human rights and making
sure the story of the Underground Railroad was preserved in a
museum devoted to the subject he was founding in Cincinnati.
Pepper was known for his leadership and the innovations in mar
keting he had brought to Procter & Gamble. Even now, after step
ping down, he continued to be a powerful influence on P&G's
board and on the boards of several other companies.
Knowing he had attended Yale, I knew that he'd have a bio
listed on the Yale University Web site. So I tapped into my alumni
network for more information. There, I found a treasure trove of
old college affiliations and interests. It turned out we had both
been in Berkley College at Yale. That meant he must have known
Robin Winks, a warmly admired and much-respected professor
for whom I had worked while in college. When I brought up our
many common experiences, we hit it off.
By the end of our conversation, John was giving me insightful
advice about and contacts for my young company (YaYa at the
time). He invited me to keep in touch in the coming years. I hoped
our paths would cross many more times over the years, and they
certainly have. When Professor Winks—Robin—passed away just
a week later, we shared our memories of him. A few months later,
I met a successful businessman from Cincinnati who was brag
ging about the museum enshrining the Underground Railroad
and I made a point of putting him in touch with John Pepper for
fundraising. I've probably introduced two or three potential
donors to John in the last year.
I had no affiliations or organizations in common with the
other CEO I wanted to meet. Luckily, a random Google search
revealed that she had run the New York City Marathon the previ
ous year. I know firsthand how much commitment and sacrifice it
takes to train day in and day out to run and complete a marathon.
I had tried—and failed. I had begun to train for a marathon one
year, but my knees started to act up, to my disappointment. By the
way, I'm always looking for good advice on how I might someday
be able to run a marathon.
When I ran into this CEO, I said, "You know, I don't know how
you do it. I like to think I'm in great shape, but the training for a
marathon killed me. I had to stop."
Of course, she was surprised. "How the heck did you know I
ran a marathon?" she happily quipped.
I never shy away from mentioning the research I've done. "I
always make a special effort to inquire about the people I'd like to
meet." Inevitably, people are flattered. Wouldn't you be? Instantly,
the other person knows that rather than suffering through a
strained half hour with a stranger, they're able to connect with
someone with whom they share an interest, someone who has
gone out of his way to get to know them better.
As it happened, the day before I had gone through "Barry's
Boot Camp," a tough-as-nails but totally exhilarating exercise
regimen in West Hollywood, not far from the conference. I said,
"If you want an amazing and different workout sometime, you
should consider boot camp." In return, I received some welcome
advice for extending my running regimen. Later, she tried boot
camp with me and loved it.
To this day, each time she and I meet, we talk about Barry's
Boot Camp and I give her my progress report on my goal of run
ning a marathon. And what I have found with those I've converted
to my boot camp workout is that when they visit L.A., they might
not have time to take a meeting or lunch with others, but they
often do make one nonbusiness detour—and we have one hard
core workout together.
Once again, your goal in such a setting is to transform what
could be a forgettable encounter into a blossoming friendship.
There are shortcuts in my system, but this isn't one of them. I
wouldn't have been able to reach out to these individuals, and
truly connect, without doing my homework.