20 Develop a Sense of Urgency
Do not wait; the time will never be “just right.” Start where you
stand, and work with whatever tools you may have at your
command, and better tools will be found as you go along.
NAPOLEON HILL
Perhaps the most outwardly identifiable quality of high-performing men and
women is action orientation. They are in a hurry to get their key tasks completed.
Highly productive people take the time to think, plan, and set priorities. They
then launch quickly and strongly toward their goals and objectives. They work
steadily, smoothly, and continuously. As a result, they seem to power through
enormous amounts of work in the same amount of time that the average person
spends socializing, wasting time, and working on low-value activities.
Getting into “Flow”
When you work on your most important tasks at a high and continuous level of
activity, you can actually enter into an amazing mental state called “flow.”
Almost everyone has experienced this at some time. Really successful people are
those who get themselves into this state far more often than the average person.
When you’re in the state of flow, which is the highest human state of
performance and productivity, something almost miraculous happens to your
mind and emotions. You feel elated and clear. Everything you do seems
effortless and accurate. You feel happy and energized. You experience a
tremendous sense of calm and increased personal effectiveness.
In the state of flow, identified and talked about over the centuries, you
actually function on a higher plane of clarity, creativity, and competence. You
are more sensitive and aware. Your insight and intuition guide you and direct
you to do and say exactly the right things at the right time. You see the
interconnectedness of people and circumstances around you. You often come up
interconnectedness of people and circumstances around you. You often come up
with brilliant ideas and insights that enable you to move ahead even more
rapidly.
Trigger High Performance in Yourself
One of the ways you can trigger this state of flow is by developing a sense of
urgency. This is an inner drive and desire to get on with the job quickly and get
it done fast. It is an impatience that motivates you to get going and to keep
going. A sense of urgency feels very much like racing against yourself.
With this ingrained sense of urgency, you develop a “bias for action.” You
take action rather than talking continually about what you are going to do. You
focus on specific steps you can take immediately. You concentrate on the things
you can do right now to get the results you want and achieve the goals you
desire.
A fast tempo seems to go hand in hand with all great success. Developing this
tempo requires that you start moving and keep moving at a steady rate. The
faster you move, the more impelled you feel to do even more even faster. You
enter “the zone.”
Build Up a Sense of Momentum
When you regularly take continuous action toward your most important goals,
you activate the Momentum Principle of Success. This principle says that
although it may take tremendous amounts of energy to overcome inertia and get
started initially, it then takes far less energy to keep going.
The good news is that the faster you move, the more energy you have. The
faster you move, the more you get done and the more effective you feel. The
faster you move, the more experience you get and the more you learn. The faster
you move, the more competent and capable you become at your work.
A sense of urgency shifts you automatically onto the fast track in your career.
The faster you work and the more you get done, the higher will be your levels of
self-esteem, self-respect, and personal pride. You will feel in complete control of
your life and your work.
Do It Now!
One of the simplest and yet most powerful ways to get yourself started is to
repeat the words “Do it now! Do it now! Do it now!” over and over to yourself.
If you feel yourself slowing down or becoming distracted by conversations or
low-value activities, repeat to yourself the words “Back to work! Back to work!
Back to work!” over and over.
In the final analysis, nothing will help you more in your career than for you to
get the reputation for being the kind of person who gets important work done
quickly and well. This reputation will make you one of the most valuable and
respected people in your field.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Resolve today to develop a sense of urgency in everything you do. Select
one area where you have a tendency to procrastinate, and make a decision
to develop the habit of fast action in that area.
2. When you see an opportunity or a problem, take action on it
immediately. When you are given a task or responsibility, take care of it
quickly and report back fast. Move rapidly in every important area of your
life. You will be amazed at how much better you feel and how much more
you get done.