CHAPTER 1 3
Follow Up or Fail
How often do you find yourself standing face-to-face with
someone you've met before, but you can't recall their name?
We live in a fast-paced digital world that bombards us with
information. Our inboxes are a constant procession of new and
old names demanding our attention. Our brains are in constant
overdrive trying to keep track of all the bits and bytes and names
that cross our desk each and every day. It's natural that to stay
sane, we must forget or ignore most of the data clamoring for a
sliver of real estate in our already overcrowded noggins.
In such a world, it's incomprehensible that only a small per
centage of us decide to follow up once we've met someone new. I
can't say this strongly enough: When you meet someone with
whom you want to establish a relationship, take the extra little
step to ensure you won't be lost in their mental attic.
Just recently, I was down in Florida giving a speech at an
awards ceremony for past and present members of my college fra
ternity, Sigma Chi. I probably gave my card and e-mail address out
to at least a hundred people that night. After the black-tie affair
had ended, I retreated to my hotel in the wee hours of the morn-
ing and checked my e-mail. There, in my inbox, was a simple gra
cious note from a young fraternity brother expressing his thanks
for the speech, what it meant to him as someone who came from
a similar background, and his hopes that someday he and I might
sit down for a cup of coffee. Within the next two weeks, well over
a hundred people e-mailed or called to express similar sentiments.
The follow-up I remember best is the one I got first.
The most memorable gifts I have ever received are those whose
value could not be measured in terms of dollars and cents. They
are the heartfelt letters, e-mails, and cards I receive from people
thanking me for guidance and advice.
Do you want to stand out from the crowd? Then you'll be
miles ahead by following up better and smarter than the hordes
scrambling for the person's attention. The fact is, most people
don't follow up very well, if at all. Good follow-up alone elevates
you above 95 percent of your peers. The follow-up is the hammer
and nails of your networking tool kit.
In fact, FOLLOW-UP IS THE KEY TO SUCCESS IN ANY
FIELD.
Making sure a new acquaintance retains your name (and the
favorable impression you've created) is a process you should set in
motion right after you've met someone.
Give yourself between twelve and twenty-four hours after you
meet someone to follow up. If you meet somebody on a plane,
send them an e-mail later that day. If you meet somebody over
cocktails, again, send them an e-mail the next morning. For ran
dom encounters and chance meetings, e-mail is a fine tool for
dropping a quick note to say, "It was a pleasure meeting you. We
must keep in touch." In such an e-mail, I like to cite something
particular we talked about in the course of our conversation—
whether a shared hobby or business interest—that serves as a
mental reminder of who I am. When I leave the meeting, I put the
name and e-mail address of the new acquaintance in my database
and program my PDA or BlackBerry to remind me in a month's
time to drop the person another e-mail, just to keep in touch.
Why go to all the trouble of meeting new people if you're not
going to work on making them a part of your life?
In the aftermath of a business meeting, I've taken to doing
something my classmate at HBS and former COO James Clark
swears by. In his follow-up, he always reiterates the commitments
everyone has made, and asks when a second follow-up meeting
can be arranged.
When the other person has agreed to do something, whether
it's meeting for coffee next time you're in town or signing a major
deal, try to get it in writing. It's shouldn't be formulaic or ironclad,
just something such as "It was great talking to you over lunch yes
terday. I wanted to follow up with some thoughts we discussed
yesterday. I believe FerrazziGreenlight can serve the interests of
your company, and I've had time to work out the finer details. The
next time I'm in town, I'd love to get on your calendar and chat for
five or ten minutes."
Nine times out of ten, the person will casually write back
accepting your offer to meet again. Then, when the time comes to
take that person up on his offer to talk again, you can call him
with the force of his e-mail commitment "in writing" behind you.
He's already agreed to meet. Now the question is when, and your
persistence will assure that happens at some point.
But remember—and this is critical—don't remind them of
what they can do for you, but focus on what you might be able to
do for them. It's about giving them a reason to want to follow up.
Another effective way to follow up is to clip relevant articles
and send them to the people in your network who might be inter
ested. When people do this for me, I'm tremendously apprecia
tive; it shows they're thinking about me and the issues I'm facing.
While e-mail is one perfectly acceptable way to follow up, there
are other methods to consider. A handwritten thank-you note
these days can particularly capture a person's attention. When's
the last time you received a handwritten letter? When you get
something addressed to you personally, you open it.
The thank-you note is an opportunity to reinforce a percep
tion of continuity in a relationship and create an aura of goodwill.
Mention any pertinent information you failed to bring up in your
meeting. Emphasize both your desire to meet again and your offer
to help.
Here are a few more reminders of what to include in your
follow-ups:
• Always express your gratitude.
• Be sure to include an item of interest from your meeting or
conversation—a joke or a shared moment of humor.
• Reaffirm whatever commitments you both made—going both
ways.
• Be brief and to the point.
• Always address the thank-you note to the person by name.
• Use e-mail and snail mail. The combination adds a personal
ized touch.
• Timeliness is key. Send them as soon as possible after the meet
ing or interview.
• Many people wait until the holidays to say thank you or reach
out. Why wait? Your follow-ups will be timelier, more appro
priate, and certainly better remembered.
• Don't forget to follow up with those who have acted as the go-
between for you and someone else. Let the original referrer
know how the conversation went, and express your apprecia
tion for their help.
Make follow-up a habit. Make it automatic. When you do,
the days of struggling to remember people's names—and of other
people struggling to remember yours—will be a thing of the
past.