CHAPTER 28
Never Give in to Hubris
In my Ph.D. section on connecting, I tried to impart some of the
lessons I've learned as someone known as a master at connect
ing with people. But I'd be remiss if I didn't tell one short, embar
rassing story that taught me early on what may be the most
important lesson of all.
It is a cautionary tale about what not to do and how not to act.
The pursuit of a powerful network of friends is not in and of
itself a bad thing. But the closer you get to powerful people, the
more powerful you tend to feel. There is a point where your reach
ing out to others will pick up momentum; one powerful contact
will lead to another and then to the next. It can be a very fun and
motivating and important ride.
Don't let a little vanity seep into your actions or excite more
expectations or create a deeper sense of entitlement. Don't get
your Ph.D. in master connecting, and then, for some reason, for
get all the classes and values that were your foundation.
Everyone fails in life. What will you do when the phone calls that
were once returned immediately now don't even get a response?
When I ran for City Council of New Haven as a sophomore
against a fellow classmate, the idea of a kid running for local gov
ernment made a special-interest news item. It wasn't long before a
reporter from the New York Times showed up to write an article.
Little did I know then that that one Times article would provide
me with one of the more painful and useful lessons of my life. For
I had angered William F. Buckley Jr., the famous Yale alum known
for founding the conservative magazine National Review and
authoring dozens of books.
I ran for office as a Republican. The Republicans needed a can
didate, and at Yale, they were the minority as opposed to the many
limousine liberals who seemed to a steelworking kid from Pitts
burgh insincere and unthinking. Anyway, I was a youngster, and I
was still exploring my political sensibilities. I probably also had a
certain affinity for the traditionalism of the moderate conserva
tive party on campus called the Tories and a real fondness for their
parties and the commitment of their leadership and alumni.
But this story is not about politics. It's about pride and ego.
Back then, I hadn't yet realized that my upbringing could be
a well of strength rather than weakness. Insecurity drove me to act
in ways I wish I hadn't. My leadership style, for instance, was far
from inclusive. While I was racking up accomplishments, my
sheer will and ambition alienated a lot of people. I trumpeted my
awards and failed to recognize those who had helped make them
possible. Too much hubris and not enough humility, as my dad
might say, though not in so many words.
I was showing all those kids whom I had caddied for back at
the club that I was just as good as they were.
I lost the election, as you know, but the New York Times article
had been read by quite a number of people, and by a few who
thought being a Republican at Yale was a good thing. In my mail
box, weeks after the election, I received a short note.
"So happy to see that there is at least one Republican at Yale.
Come see me sometime. WFB."
William F. Buckley Jr. had taken the time to write me\ I was
floored. I became an instant celebrity in our small circle.
Of course, the man had issued an invitation and I, for one, was
going to take him up on the offer. I immediately set about contact
ing Mr. Buckley to set a date for a meeting. He graciously invited
me to his home and even suggested I bring a few friends along.
A few months later, with three other classmates in tow, I
arrived at a Connecticut train station where we were greeted by
none other than Mr. Buckley himself in an old pair of khakis and
a wrinkled button-down shirt. He drove us to his home, where we
met his wife, who was gardening at the time. It was a glorious day.
We shared a few glasses of wine, talked politics, Mr. Buckley
played the harpsichord, and then we all sat down for a lengthy
lunch. Afterward, we were invited to take a dip in the Buckleys'
beautiful pool with tile mosaics reminiscent of a Roman bath.
I couldn't let the opportunity pass. Mr. Buckley wasn't the only
Yale alum dissatisfied with the political climate at his alma mater.
Other conservative alumni were complaining. Many stopped giv
ing money to Yale outright. I thought I had a solution that would
be a real win-win for the campus and for these alums.
What if, I suggested, we create a foundation that allowed dis
enfranchised conservative alums the ability to give money directly
to the undergraduate organizations that represented the tradi
tional values they supported? Yale wins because it would be get
ting money that it otherwise wouldn't. Conservative alumni win
because they could again feel good about their school and their
ability to make a contribution. Students win because there would
be more organizational diversity and money for campus clubs.
What could be better?
Well, I made the pitch and I thought Mr. Buckley embraced the
idea. He told me that he had started a foundation to fund a stu
dent publication a few years before that had never quite got off the
ground. There was, he said, still money in the foundation, and he
would be happy to put it toward my idea. That is, at least, what I
heard. In my excitement, I left the i's undotted and t's uncrossed
for fear of a good thing getting spoiled. "Never sell beyond the
close," as they say, and I thought I had the close.
Do they ever add that you better be damn sure both parties know
what, exactly, is being closed and that both remember thereafter?
When I returned to campus, I didn't conceal my excitement. I
made sure everyone knew that I was the new president of a brand-
spankin'-new organization. Boy, wasn't I cool? I started searching
out other alumni who might be interested in contributing to the
cause. I hit the phones, and on weekends, I'd go to New York to
pitch other alumni on the new foundation that William F. Buckley
and I were starting.
"Bill Buckley put in some money. Would you also like to help
out?" I'd ask them. And they did. On each return trip from New
York, my head got bigger and bigger as I reveled in the famous and
powerful people that were giving me (note the use of "me," not
"us") money.
My poor classmates had to suffer my telling stories of my latest
escapade to New York. Then, as quickly as it started, my ever-so-
brief brush with fame came to a screeching halt.
As luck would have it, Mr. Buckley found himself one day in an
elevator with one of the other famous alums who had pledged
money. "Bill," this gentleman said, "I matched your contribution
to this new foundation at Yale." To which Bill replied, "What foun
dation?"
It turned out that Mr. Buckley did not recall our conversation.
Or maybe he told me one thing and I heard something quite differ
ent. Maybe he just thought I wanted to rekindle the magazine. But
by then, it was irrelevant. Mr. Buckley could recall only his stalled
magazine and a vague reference to restarting it at Yale. He told the
other donor he was not the cofounder of a new conservative foun
dation at Yale, which I'm sure was the way he saw it. At which
point, everything unraveled.
The pledges I had received needed to go unrealized, as there
was no repository for them any longer. Mr. Buckley didn't return
my calls. Most important, and to my shock, my friends who were
present and equally excited that day at Mr. Buckley's didn't come
to my rescue when I pleaded for them to explain that they had
heard exactly what I had heard. My reputation had been tarnished
among some important people. I was embarrassed among my
friends after I had been gloating. And then to add rock salt to the
wound, someone at Yale's college newspaper got wind of all that
had happened and created an illustration depicting me as getting
wounded by large, famous names being dropped from the sky.
Ouch, indeed, and I deserved it.
Looking back now, I'm appreciative of the experience. I learned
some valuable lessons. For one, I had to begin the journey to
change my leadership style. It wasn't enough to get things done.
You had to get things done and make the people around you feel
involved, and not just part of the process but part of the leadership.
I learned that commitments weren't commitments unless every
one involved knew what was on the table with absolute clarity. I
learned how truly small the world is, especially the world of the
rich and powerful.
Most important, I learned that arrogance is a disease that can
betray you into forgetting your real friends and why they're so
important. Even with the best of intentions, too much hubris will
stir up other people's ire and their desire to put you in your place.
So remember, in your hike up the mountain, be humble. Help
others up the mountain along with and before you. Never let the
prospect of a more powerful or famous acquaintance make you
lose sight of the fact that the most valuable connections you have
are those you've already made at all levels. I reach back into my
past regularly to touch base with the folks who have meant so
much to me since I was a kid. I go out of my way to tell the early
mentors what they meant to me and how much they were respon
sible for my success today.