14 Motivate Yourself into Action
It is in the compelling zest of high adventure and of victory, and
of creative action that man finds his supreme joys.
ANTOINE DE SAINT-EXUPÉRY
To perform at your best, you must become your own personal cheerleader. You
must develop a routine of coaching yourself and encouraging yourself to play at
the top of your game.
Most of your emotions, positive or negative, are determined by how you talk
to yourself on a minute-to-minute basis. It is not what happens to you but the
way that you interpret the things that are happening to you that determines how
you feel. Your version of events largely determines whether these events
motivate or de-motivate you, whether they energize or de-energize you.
To keep yourself motivated, you must resolve to become a complete optimist.
You must decide to respond positively to the words, actions, and reactions of the
people and situations around you. You must refuse to let the unavoidable
difficulties and setbacks of daily life affect your mood or emotions.
Control Your Inner Dialogue
Your level of self-esteem, how much you like and respect yourself, is central to
your levels of motivation and persistence. You should talk to yourself positively
all the time to boost your self-esteem. Say, “I like myself! I like myself!” over
and over until you begin to believe it and behave like a person with a high-
performance personality.
To keep yourself motivated and to overcome feelings of doubt or fear,
continually tell yourself, “I can do it! I can do it!” When people ask you how
you are, always tell them, “I feel terrific!”
No matter how you really feel at the moment or what is happening in your

life, resolve to remain cheerful and upbeat. As Viktor Frankl wrote in his
bestselling book Man’s Search for Meaning, “The last of the human freedoms
[is] to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances.”
Refuse to complain about your problems. Keep them to yourself. As speaker-
humorist Ed Foreman says, “You should never share your problems with others
because 80 percent of people don’t care about them anyway, and the other 20
percent are kind of glad that you’ve got them in the first place.”
Develop a Positive Mental Attitude
In Martin Seligman’s twenty-two-year study at the University of Pennsylvania,
summarized in his book Learned Optimism, he determined that optimism is the
most important quality you can develop for personal and professional success
and happiness. Optimistic people seem to be more effective in almost every area
of life.
It turns out that optimists have four special behaviors, all learned through
practice and repetition. First, optimists look for the good in every situation. No
matter what goes wrong, they always look for something good or beneficial. And
not surprisingly, they always seem to find it.
Second, optimists always seek the valuable lesson in every setback or
difficulty. They believe that “difficulties come not to obstruct but to instruct.”
They believe that each setback or obstacle contains a valuable lesson they can
learn and grow from, and they are determined to find it.
Third, optimists always look for the solution to every problem. Instead of
blaming or complaining when things go wrong, they become action oriented.
They ask questions like “What’s the solution? What can we do now? What’s the
next step?”
Fourth, optimists think and talk continually about their goals. They think
about what they want and how to get it. They think and talk about the future and
where they are going rather than the past and where they came from. They are
always looking forward rather than backward.
When you continually visualize your goals and ideals and talk to yourself in a
positive way, you feel more focused and energized. You feel more confident and
creative. You experience a greater sense of control and personal power.
And the more positive and motivated you feel, the more eager you will be to
get started and the more determined you will be to keep going.

EAT THAT FROG!
1. Control your thoughts. Remember, you become what you think about
most of the time. Be sure that you are thinking and talking about the things
you want rather than the things you don’t want.
2. Keep your mind positive by accepting complete responsibility for
yourself and for everything that happens to you. Refuse to criticize others,
complain, or blame others for anything. Resolve to make progress rather
than excuses. Keep your thoughts and your energy focused forward, on
what you can do right now to improve your life, and let the rest go.