CHAPTER 1 6
Expanding Your Circle
The most efficient way to enlarge and tap the full potential of
your circle of friends is, quite simply, to connect your circle
with someone else's. I don't think of a network of people as a
"net," into which you wrangle contacts like a school of struggling
cod. Again, it's like the Internet, an interconnecting series of links
in which each link works collaboratively to strengthen and expand
the overall community.
Such collaboration means seeing each person in your network
as a partner. Like a business in which cofounders take responsibil
ity for different parts of the company, networking partners help
each other, and by extension their respective networks, by taking
responsibility for that part of the web that is theirs and providing
access to it as needed. In other words, they exchange networks.
The boundaries of any network are fluid and constantly open.
Let me give you an example of what I mean from my own life.
One Saturday afternoon, I went to join my friend Tad and his wife
Caroline at the Hotel Bel-Air in Los Angeles. Tad introduced me
to Lisa, the manager of the hotel, who cuts a striking pose: tall,
blond, articulate, charming, funny, and casual all at the same time.
"If between the two of you there's someone in L.A. you don't
know, I'll be very surprised," Tad told us. In his eyes, we were both
master networkers. Lisa was, as many in the hospitality business
are, a super-connector.
Within ten minutes of meeting each other, we knew we were
going to be great friends. Lisa and I spoke the same language.
Lisa had heard about the dinner parties I regularly threw for
business. Your guests should be staying at the Bel-Air during their
L.A. jaunts, she told me. I, in turn, looked around the Bel-Air and
thought how memorable it would be to hold some of my events in
such swanky surroundings. Could Lisa and I form a social part
nership?
So I made a simple suggestion.
"Lisa, let's share a few months of dinner parties. You hold a
dinner party at the Bel-Air and give me half the invite list. Then I'll
hold one of my dinner parties and give you half of the list. We'll
split the tab for each event, saving each of us a bundle of money,
and together we'll meet a lot of new, exciting people. By cohosting
the events, we'll make them that much more successful."
Lisa agreed, and our dinner parties were a huge success. The
unique mix of people from the worlds of business and entertain
ment was fun and interesting. Not only did we introduce our
friends to an entirely new group of people, but the dynamic at the
parties was exhilarating.
Politicians, the inveterate masters of networking, have
exchanged their networks in this fashion for years. They have
what are called "host committees," groups of people hailing from
different social worlds who are loyal to a specific politician and
charged with introducing their candidate to their respective circle
of friends. A typical well-established politician will have a host
committee of doctors, lawyers, insurance professionals, college
kids, and so on. Each committee is made up of well-connected
people in their respective worlds who organize parties and events
granting the politician access to all their friends. To my mind, it
offers a great template for people looking to expand their own
network.
Are there worlds you want more access to? If so, see if you
can find a central figure within that world to act as your own
one-person host committee. In a business context, say you plan on
selling a new product that your company is introducing several
months down the line, and most of your customers will be
lawyers. Go to your personal lawyer, tell him about the product,
and ask him or her if they'd be willing to come to a dinner with a
few of their lawyer friends that you'd like to host. Tell them that
not only will they get an early look at this fabulous new product,
but they'll have an opportunity to meet your friends, who could
become potential clients. They'll become responsible for holding
events that will usher you into their group of friends. You'll
become responsible for doing the same for them. This is exactly
what I am doing at FerrazziGreenlight Training & Development
as we roll out our training course "Relationships for Revenue
Growth" into the legal profession. This training and development
has been successfully taught at consulting firms, financial services
companies, and to software sales forces and many others. But who
better to capitalize from relationship selling but lawyers?
This kind of partnering works wonderfully. But the underlying
dynamic at work has to be mutual benefit. It should be a win-win
for all involved.
If you are sharing someone else's circle of friends, be sure that
you adequately acknowledge the person who ushered you into
this new world, and do so in all the subsequent connections that
they helped foster.
Never forget the person who brought you to the dance. I once
mistakenly invited a brand-new friend to a party without inviting
the person who introduced us. It was a terrible mistake, and an
unfortunate lapse in judgment on my part. Trust is integral to an
exchange of networks that demands treating the other person's
contacts with the utmost respect.
As your community grows, partnering becomes more of a
necessity. It becomes a matter of efficiency. One contact holds the
key to maintaining all the other relationships in his or her net
work. He or she is the gatekeeper to a whole new world. You can
meet dozens, even hundreds of other people through your rela
tionship with one other key connector.
Two quick rules of thumb:
1. You and the person you are sharing contacts with must be
equal partners that give as much as they get.
2. You must be able to trust your partners because, after all,
you're vouching for them and their behavior with your net
work is a reflection on you.
A word of caution—never give any one person complete access
to your entire list of contacts. This is not a free-for-all. You should
be aware of who in your network is interested in being contacted
and how. Exchanging contacts should take place around specific
events, functions, or causes. Consider carefully how your partner
wants to use your network and how you expect to use his. In this
way, you'll be more helpful to the other person, which is the kind of
genuine reciprocity that makes partnering, and the world, work.