18 Slice and Dice the Task
The beginning of a habit is like an invisible thread, but every
time we repeat the act we strengthen the strand, add to it another
filament, until it becomes a great cable and binds us irrevocably,
in thought and act.
ORISON SWETT MARDEN
A major reason for procrastinating on big, important tasks is that they appear so
large and formidable when you first approach them.
One technique that you can use to cut a big task down to size is the “salami
slice” method of getting work done. With this method, you lay out the task in
detail, writing down every step in order, and then resolve to do just one slice of
the job for the time being, like eating a roll of salami one slice at a time—or like
eating an elephant one bite at a time.
Psychologically, you will find it easier to do a single, small piece of a large
project than to start on the whole job. Often, once you have started and
completed a single part of the job, you will feel like doing just one more slice.
Soon, you will find yourself working through the job one part at a time, and
before you know it, the job will be completed.
Develop a Compulsion to Closure
An important point to remember is that you have deep within you an “urge to
completion,” or what is often referred to as a “compulsion to closure.” This
means that you actually feel happier and more powerful when you start and
complete a task of any kind. You satisfy a deep subconscious need to bring
finality to a job or project. This sense of completion or closure motivates you to
start the next task or project and then to persist toward final completion. This act
of completion triggers the release of endorphins in your brain, mentioned earlier.
And the bigger the task you start and complete, the better and more elated you

And the bigger the task you start and complete, the better and more elated you
feel. The bigger the frog you eat, the greater the surge of personal power and
energy you experience.
When you start and finish a small piece of a task, you feel motivated to start
and finish another part, then another, and so on. Each small step forward
energizes you. You soon develop an inner drive that motivates you to carry
through to completion.
“Swiss Cheese” Your Tasks
Another technique you can use is called the “Swiss cheese” method of working.
You use this technique to get yourself into gear by resolving to punch a hole in
the task, like a hole in a block of Swiss cheese.
You “Swiss cheese” a task when you resolve to work for a specific time
period on it. This may be as little as five or ten minutes, after which you will
stop and do something else. You will just take one bite of your frog and then rest
or do something else.
The power of this method is similar to that of the salami slice method. Once
you start working, you develop a sense of forward momentum and a feeling of
accomplishment. You become energized and enthusiastic. You feel yourself
internally motivated and propelled to keep going until the task is complete.
You should try the salami slice or the Swiss cheese method on any task that
seems overwhelming when you approach it for the first time. You will be
amazed at how helpful each technique is in overcoming procrastination.
I have several friends who have become bestselling authors by simply
resolving to write one page or even one paragraph per day until the book was
completed. And you can do the same.
EAT THAT FROG!

1. Put the “salami slice” or “Swiss cheese” technique into action
immediately to get started on a large, complex, multitask job that you’ve
been putting off.
2. Become action oriented. A common quality of high performers is that
when they hear a good idea, they take action on it immediately. Don’t
delay. Try it today!

19 Create Large Chunks of Time
Nothing can add more power to your life than concentrating all
of your energies on a limited set of targets.
NIDO QUBEIN
Most of the really important work you do requires large chunks of unbroken
time to complete. Your ability to carve out and use these blocks of high-value,
highly productive time is central to your ability to make a significant
contribution to your work and to your life.
Successful salespeople set aside a specific time period each day to phone
prospects. Rather than procrastinating or delaying on a task that they don’t
particularly like, they resolve that they will phone for one solid hour—between
10:00 and 11:00 a.m., for example—and they discipline themselves to follow
through on their resolution.
Many business executives set aside a specific time each day to call customers
directly to get feedback, to return phone calls, or to answer correspondence.
Some people allocate specific thirty-to-sixty-minute time periods each day for
exercise. Many people read great books fifteen minutes each night before
retiring. In this way, over time, they eventually read dozens of the best books
ever written.
Schedule Blocks of Time
The key to the success of this method of working in specific time segments is for
you to plan your day in advance and schedule a fixed time period for a particular
activity or task. Make work appointments with yourself and then discipline
yourself to keep them. Set aside thirty-, sixty-, and ninety-minute time segments
that you use to work on and complete important tasks.
Many highly productive people schedule specific activities in preplanned time
slots all day long. These people build their work lives around accomplishing key
tasks one at a time. As a result, they become more and more productive and

tasks one at a time. As a result, they become more and more productive and
eventually produce two times, three times, and five times as much as the average
person.
Use a Time Planner
A time planner, broken down by day, hour, and minute and organized in
advance, can be one of the most powerful personal productivity tools of all. It
enables you to see where you can consolidate and create blocks of time for
concentrated work.
During these working times, turn off the telephone, eliminate all distractions,
and work nonstop. One of the best work habits of all is to get up early and work
at home in the morning for two to three hours. You can get three times as much
work done at home without interruptions as you ever could in a busy office
where you are surrounded by people and bombarded by phone calls.
Make Every Minute Count
When you fly on business, you can create your office in the air by planning your
work thoroughly before you depart. When the plane takes off, you can work
nonstop for the entire flight. You will be amazed at how much work you can go
through when you work steadily in an airplane, without interruptions.
One of the keys to high levels of performance and productivity is to make
every minute count. Use travel and transition times, what are often called “gifts
of time,” to complete small chunks of larger tasks.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Think continually of different ways that you can save, schedule, and

consolidate large chunks of time. Use these times to work on important
tasks with the most significant long-term consequences.
2. Make every minute count. Work steadily and continuously without
diversion or distraction by planning and preparing your work in advance.
Most of all, keep focused on the most important results for which you are
responsible.