# 01. Courage can be learned

This is an audio course. Thank you for listening. And in particular the counterintuitive or surprising discoveries you've made about courage at work over your research career? Well, I think a few insights that have emerged that might seem counterintuitive, or at least they are counter to the narrative.

So, for example, I think we have a myth. In fact, I know we have a myth that courage is some, kind of, you know, inborn trait or capacity that a few possess, but most don't. And, you know, having studied literally thousands of individual actors and acts of courage, I can tell you that there is no magic gene. There's no magic personality trait, background experience.

People who step up and do the right thing at work when they could and should, very tremendously on every dimension you and I can name. So one, sort of, insight or, sort of, myth busting for me has been, it is not about a personal type, it is about a personal choice. And I think related to that is that people talk about courageous action as if, you know, these folks were, sort of, born ready or it was easy. But in fact, when you study folks, whether you're talking about John Lewis, for example, in the political realm or so many people I studied in, you know, more regular, kinds of, workplaces, what you realize is that actually what looks like this natural competence comes from hard work.

Years of practice, years of trying things, learning how to be more effective. So that's the second takeaway, is that this is like any skill. It's developed through practice and commitment. Maybe one insight about or about the process itself is we think a lot about the moment, right?

When somebody speaks up or steps out, that's the thing we remember and tend to pass on through narrative. But it turns out that what seems to make a difference in many cases for how those moments go is the preparation work and the things people do before those acts, and then maybe most surprisingly, what they do after. So skillful actors don't just manage the moment well, they're really good about after the fact, following up when things seem to have gone well, you know, getting commitments, securing resources, and when things didn't go so well they're courageous enough to go have yet another difficult conversation and say, hey, you know, you look upset or angry or your body language suggested you weren't on board. Can we talk about that?

And I think that follow-up is something we don't think much at all about because we're so focused on that big bang moment itself.
