# 03. Courage fulfills us

Is it in professionals best interest to choose courage? Will that help them be more awesome and advance their jobs, or is it better to play it safe? How do you think about that? So I think there's basically two answers to that question.

I mean, first of all, depends on your goals. If your goals are basically to just get ahead potentially as quickly as possible, then frankly, you and I know there are lots of organizations where the definition of being awesome at your job is keeping your head down, doing what you're told, and just delivering. And in that regard, you can say choosing courage in the short run, not a great idea. On the other hand, if you say I want to live a life where I felt I had agency, where I was authentic, I was true to myself, I lived my values, then it's the right choice to make.

Another way to think about it is over what time horizon? So if you're talking about whether choosing courage will necessarily put me in line first for the next promotion, well, maybe, maybe not. But when you start to look at a longer time horizon, like, will I be proud of the legacy I'm creating? Will others really remember me and wanna stand with me?

Will I have long term regrets or not? That's when this choice is so critical. If you look at re -- the regret literature, for example, it's pretty well established that people by a large margin tend to regret inactions. Things they think they should have done and didn't, then actions they took that didn't go well.

This is true even, you know, in people who suffer pretty big consequences. Whistleblowers, for example, almost none of them say they regret doing it. So what I would say to listeners is it depends. If you're talking about how to be most popular, get ahead tomorrow, well, sticking your neck out is not always the best approach.

If you're talking about living where you or I or Aristotle or anybody else would call the good life, then I'd say, yeah, you got to choose courage sometimes. And I'd imagine with, sort of, any measure of prudent risk taking and say, I'm gonna take on this big project or responsibility or duty or opportunity where the outcome is uncertain. I think that a level of that is essential for a career to advance. Otherwise, you don't seem that special.

It's like, okay, you did your job within the realm of ordinary responsibilities. You didn't deliver any really cool, sort of, noteworthy improvements. So -- Yeah. I mean, okay, I would say if we're really honest, there are a few paths probably right to eventually standing out.

One, of course, is to be the absolutely best political player. Right. Attach yourself to the most important people and play their game and, you know, you'll get ahead to some degree. Now, for those of us who find that approach distasteful in a variety of ways, I think you're right.

You have to stand out eventually and with some consistency in other ways. And that's where there's such a difference between just being courageous and being competently courageous. My book is titled "Choosing Courage." In many respects it should have been titled "Choosing Competent Courage," because indeed, the route to success is not just speaking up or speaking out, pushing back against every possible thing you could in offensive language or with terrible emotional violence, it's about doing those things in ways to your point that help you stand out positively. Because not just did you point out a problem, a path forward, a way to expand a market, a creative idea, but you did it in a way that those above you could hear that they weren't offended by.

Because at the end of the day, right, you can stand out in positive or negative ways. And what you're referring to is how do you stand out in positive ways. And that's about skills when you behave courageously.
