# 04. Four fears hold courage back

Could you make it all the more real for us in terms of some examples of common places where courageous acts make all the difference at work at -- or where people often shy away? Kind of -- what specific, kinds of, moments are we talking about here? So there are few, sort of, prototypical types of acts that if you sample, you know, thousands of people, as I have, say, 75% or more will say, yeah, unfortunately these behaviors are moderately courageous or more. The most obvious type of behavior -- set of behaviors are what I call truth to power behavior.

So these are challenging your boss or skip level bosses. You know, it could be about policies or practices. It could be about interpersonal behaviors that are offensive or hurtful. It could be about actually illegal or unethical things.

It can be about going to bat for your own subordinates to people above you. So lots of truth to power behaviors. Somewhat surprising going back to that conversation, I was surprised the degree to which when I just asked people, you know, tell me about a behavior at work that would be courageous. I expected that everybody would say truth to power type behaviors.

What I wasn't prepared for was the frequency of people talking about how hard it was to have honest conversation with peers or even have honest conversations or give difficult feedback to subordinates. And the reason I think that was originally surprising to me is I was thinking primarily of risk in terms of economic or career consequences. Right. If it doesn't go well, my promotion, my pay, my future here is at stake.

It turns out people have a few fundamental fears, and that's only one of them. People are also highly afraid of social consequences. If you think about it, it makes sense, right? We evolved in small clans, bands, tribes, and our daily task was survival.

And if you got ostracized from your group, you were gonna die and you were going to die in short order. And so it's not illogical that even though that's not our environment today, evolutionarily we're still programmed to be hugely afraid of being ostracized, to have social consequences. We also hate psychological risks. You know, we don't -- if you say, why don't people step up and try a new task or take a new job or be more innovative?

The answer there is often they don't want to look stupid. They don't want to feel embarrassed. They don't want to see self-doubt creep in. And so there's actually this huge range of behaviors that's not just about challenging power.

It's about difficult interpersonal situations with peers, subordinates, external partners. It's about being innovative. Yeah. I developed an index of the most common behaviors I heard about from thousands of people, and there's 35 different behaviors.

And many of them you would probably say, gosh, for a professional or a manager, isn't that just doing your job? And I'd say, yeah, it is, but these things happen surprisingly infrequently. Okay, well, I love this. So categories of fears, economic risk might lose my job or money or promotion.

Social risk, folks will not like me, shut me, ostracize me. Psychological risk, I might feel stupid or embarrassed if I, you know, screw this up and look real dumb or those, kind of, the three categories. Are there some more there? Well, the fourth one, which is real in many contexts I didn't mention, is physical.

If you go back 2,000 years, write of courage, writing the vast history of courage, writing was about military contexts. And yeah, sure enough, there are still in military firefighting. You know, police work plenty of other settings that come to mind, there are still physical risks. And even frankly, I was surprised the degree to which folks who work in any, sort of, service occupation and bartenders, waiters, customer service, actually report cases of being physically assaulted, accosted, threatened with a weapon.

So there's physical risk also that some people face.
