# 05. Build credibility before challenging

Now, Jim, tell us if we think we want or need or should do something and we feel scared about doing it, walk us through it. How do we go about choosing confident courage? So let's talk just briefly about what you would do before you would take that specific action. Then, sort of, the moment itself and then what you would do after.

So before, some people say, hey, I'm not ready to take this specific act, and I say, that's fine, but you can still work on it every day. And they say, what does that mean? Well, what it means is the reception you're going to get to that challenge you issue is in part based on the content of the issue. Is that a highly sensitive, threatening issue to the boss?

But it's also gonna depend on the impression that boss has already formed of you. Does that boss think you're benevolent? In other words, is the reason you're speaking up because you actually care about him and others in the organization, or is it because you're self-interested and just trying to get ahead? And the boss is also gonna ask himself or herself implicitly, hey, if I listen to Jim or P and give them resources or take the action they're suggesting, are they competent?

Can they do it? Can they make good use of these resources? And so every day we are creating in others perceptions of whether we're warm and competent. And that's really sort of setting the stage, showing people we are fair, we are emotionally intelligent on a regular basis, sets the stage.

So those are things you can be doing every day. You know, another thing is the question of, is this really the right issue and is it really the right battle and the right time? Any organization I've ever studied, you could pick something to speak up about every single day, but most of them are not truly important to you and don't make a huge difference. And so having the skill to, sort of, source out what are critical to your core values and your objectives and which are, sort of, tertiary issues, that's really important.

A woman I work with, Tawanna Burnette at Facebook, African-American female leader, really a spectacular leader, and she was one of the first 20 black females at Facebook. And she said, look, if I was gonna speak up every single time somebody said something that was inappropriate or insensitive based on race or gender, I'd be doing it every day. But I also would quickly become ineffective because people stop listening to me. So she said, look, my core value, my core objective is that we have to get more black females into leadership roles -- senior leadership roles, because only then will things really change.

So her rule is, when things offend me, I ask myself, is this about the hiring evaluation or promotion of black females? And if it is, I speak up because we're not gonna get where we need to go if I don't. If it's about other things, I may choose to let it go. So it's really about, sort of, choosing wisely.
