# 07. Avoid trap words and phrases

And then, frankly, there are lots of just small things we inadvertently say, you know, we can have, sort of, a beautiful set of data compiled and we can present evidence and solutions, and in just a couple small words, we can screw things up. We often follow, for example, into the trap of naive realism, which is simply this idea that there's just one reality out there, and it just happens to be the one that I see. So if you don't see it, I way you're dumb. And when we unconsciously operate that way, we'll say things like, well, since it's so obvious that this is the case, or since this is so unambiguous, since it's so clear to everybody, since it's unquestionably the case.

Well, the effect of words, like, unambiguous or so clear or unquestionable is essentially to say, if you have any questions or doubts or see it any differently, you are a dummy or you're self-interested. So learning to speak with less certainty, learning to avoid other certain phrases, I call them frequency words. My wife and I still joke, you know, 25 years in, how often we would get distracted from the actual content of what one or the other of us was saying, because the person who pointed something out would use the word never or always. So, for example, if my wife wanted me to actually help with the dishes, she was actually quite correct if she would say, you don't help clean up as often as you could or should.

That was a correct statement. But if she would say to me, you never help me with the dishes, that never would trigger me, and I would get into a frequency argument with her and say, that's not true. And I would pull out my little no pen and say no, on Tuesday, July 30th, I actually put the pizza dishes in that. And so we'd get derailed into an argument about never or always and away from the underlying issue itself around which, you know, she or I would be right.

Also saying things, for example, like don't take it personal. I would submit to listeners that we actually never use that phrase except in situations when we know at some level it's personal. There's no reason you would say that if that wasn't the case. And so I think avoiding phrases like it's not personal.

And listeners, if they want, can easily find a short piece on hpr.org that I wrote on trap phrases and words to avoid in a conversation that speak to all of these, kinds of, examples.
