# 08. Inquire and advocate

Any words that you love. So if you go back to the great, sort of, master Chris Arduous, he talked about the idea of cognitive ladders of inference and advocacy in an inquiry. And so for listeners who haven't heard of this, the basic idea was that most of the time we communicate at what Chris called the top of the ladder, our conclusion. I say, hey, Pete, we should do this and we should do it tomorrow.

That's a conclusion. And Pete says, you know, that's crazy. We should stick with what we got. That's a conclusion.

What we failed to do is get below those cognitive ladders of inference. That is what's going on in our head. So if I'm saying, hey, we should do this and we should do it tomorrow, what I have done actually is I'm drawing on some data like, hey, here's data and what our competitors are doing. Here's data internally on how our sales have decreased recently.

I'm hey, here's some data on us losing some top talent because they're bored. And from that I might reason we need to do something new and we need to do it in a way that catches the market's attention. And therefore, I reached that conclusion I said to you. Similarly, you're saying, hey, we should stick with it the way it is.

The thing is that you're looking at other data. You may be looking and saying, you know, nobody above me has says we have a problem yet. Most of the industry is still doing what we're doing. You might therefore reason, I think things are fine.

Jim is just antsy. Therefore, let's stick with what we got. And so the specific tool here is advocacy and inquiry. And advocacy is inches yell in my conclusion more loudly.

It's helping people see why I came to that conclusion. So phrases like, can I share my data with you or can I help you see my reasoning? Things that reveal your ladder, language that reveals your ladder. And then the most powerful thing, our inquiry phrases.

Saying, hey, Pete, I heard you say that you think we should stay. Can you help me understand why? Can you help me see where you're coming from? Can you share your reasoning with me?

Skillful inquiry is perhaps the single best way to, sort of, build communication bridges. I know and have ever read about. And, you know, all you had to do is look around the world we're living in, you know, the divisiveness, politically, etc. .

And you realize we are all constantly screaming at each other from the top of our ladders, and we're not good at all of helping people see where we're coming from or taking perspective by asking people where they're coming from.
