# 09. Prepare for fear and anger

And speaking of emotions, what are your top tips on managing the emotions? Like either you're super scared or you're super angry, or when you are prepping to speak up, choose courage. Yeah, so fear and anger, right? As we sort of all intuitively know, they have the opposite action propensities, right?

So fear will tend to make you sort of flee or freeze, right? Fear is an avoidance emotion, whereas anger is an approach emotion. You know, anger makes you want to go toward the source. So the advice has to be quite different, you know, with fear, you have to do things, frankly, often ahead of time over longer periods of time.

You know, it can be about being in good physical shape, it can be about doing mindfulness yoga, anything that sort of helps you change your base physiological response. People with high fear often find they have to also take specific steps like scripting out in advance things are gonna say. They may have to practice more and have people sort of shoot back at them so they can practice soft staying in the moment and not fleeing. Most people don't physically run out of a room, but you'll see them just shut down and cave.

And so you have to really practice tamping down the fear. Anger on the other hand, is in some respects useful because if you get angry enough about something, you're actually likely to bring it up and say or do something about it. The problem with anger is you're likely to be quite unskillful, offensive, for example. And here I'll tell a story about myself.

Most people, I think, in fact, almost everybody who knows me would say Jim has no problem choosing courage. But at times Jim has had a problem with displaying competent courage. And in most instances that would be because I let anger at, you know, injustices or problems or whatever get in the way. And so part of dealing with anger is what you do in the moment.

Turns out these old adages like count to ten or take three deep breaths. These are actually quite useful because what they actually are doing is trying to engage your parasympathetic nervous system to calm down. It's often a very useful tactic to try to teach yourself, to train yourself to accept in emergencies, not speak in that moment. Let's schedule a follow up.

Allow the moment to pass and then schedule after you've sort of gotten your emotions back together. And then, frankly, part of it is knowing who you are and using strategies, sometimes even technologies, to be your friends. So in my case, you know, it's a number of years ago having made the classic mistake of, you know, firing off some emails when I was upset. I learned that you can actually set the outlook timer to basically hold all emails you send in the outbox for any designated number of minutes or hours.

And so for quite some time, I set my outlook outgoing mail to hold for 60 minutes because I knew that if I basically didn't send emails for an hour, there was a very high likelihood I would come down and revisit that email and have a chance to save it before I couldn't. So learning strategies for both lessening your anger and then sort of navigating around it are really important.
