WHEN COLLABORATION KILLS CREATIVITY
The Rise of the New Groupthink and the Power of Working Alone
I am a horse for a single harness, not cut out for tandem or teamwork … for well I
know that in order to attain any definite goal, it is imperative that one person do the
thinking and the commanding.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN
March 5, 1975. A cold and drizzly evening in Menlo Park,
California. Thirty unprepossessing-looking engineers gather in the
garage of an unemployed colleague named Gordon French. They
call themselves the Homebrew Computer Club, and this is their first
meeting. Their mission: to make computers accessible to regular
people—no small task at a time when most computers are
temperamental SUV-sized machines that only universities and
corporations can afford.
The garage is drafty, but the engineers leave the doors open to
the damp night air so people can wander inside. In walks an
uncertain young man of twenty-four, a calculator designer for
Hewlett-Packard. Serious and bespectacled, he has shoulder-length
hair and a brown beard. He takes a chair and listens quietly as the
others marvel over a new build-it-yourself computer called the
Altair 8800, which recently made the cover of Popular Electronics.
The Altair isn’t a true personal computer; it’s hard to use, and
appeals only to the type of person who shows up at a garage on a
rainy Wednesday night to talk about microchips. But it’s an
important first step.
The young man, whose name is Stephen Wozniak, is thrilled to
hear of the Altair. He’s been obsessed with electronics since the age
of three. When he was eleven he came across a magazine article
about the first computer, the ENIAC, or Electronic Numerical
Integrator and Computer, and ever since, his dream has been to
build a machine so small and easy to use that you could keep it at
home. And now, inside this garage, here is news that The Dream—
he thinks of it with capital letters—might one day materialize.
As he’ll later recall in his memoir, iWoz, where most of this story
appears, Wozniak is also excited to be surrounded by kindred
spirits. To the Homebrew crowd, computers are a tool for social
justice, and he feels the same way. Not that he talks to anyone at
this first meeting—he’s way too shy for that. But that night he goes
home and sketches his first design for a personal computer, with a
keyboard and a screen just like the kind we use today. Three
months later he builds a prototype of that machine. And ten months
after that, he and Steve Jobs cofound Apple Computer.
Today Steve Wozniak is a revered figure in Silicon Valley—there’s
a street in San Jose, California, named Woz’s Way—and is
sometimes called the nerd soul of Apple. He has learned over time
to open up and speak publicly, even appearing as a contestant on
Dancing with the Stars, where he displayed an endearing mixture of
stiffness and good cheer. I once saw Wozniak speak at a bookstore
in New York City. A standing-room-only crowd showed up bearing
their 1970s Apple operating manuals, in honor of all that he had
done for them.
But the credit is not Wozniak’s alone; it also belongs to Homebrew.
Wozniak identifies that first meeting as the beginning of the
computer revolution and one of the most important nights of his
life. So if you wanted to replicate the conditions that made Woz so
productive, you might point to Homebrew, with its collection of
like-minded souls. You might decide that Wozniak’s achievement
was a shining example of the collaborative approach to creativity.
You might conclude that people who hope to be innovative should
work in highly social workplaces.
And you might be wrong.
Consider what Wozniak did right after the meeting in Menlo
Park. Did he huddle with fellow club members to work on computer
design? No. (Although he did keep attending the meetings, every
other Wednesday.) Did he seek out a big, open office space full of
cheerful pandemonium in which ideas would cross-pollinate? No.
When you read his account of his work process on that first PC, the
most striking thing is that he was always by himself.
Wozniak did most of the work inside his cubicle at Hewlett-
Packard. He’d arrive around 6:30 a.m. and, alone in the early
morning, read engineering magazines, study chip manuals, and
prepare designs in his head. After work, he’d go home, make a
quick spaghetti or TV dinner, then drive back to the office and work
late into the night. He describes this period of quiet midnights and
solitary sunrises as “the biggest high ever.” His efforts paid off on
the night of June 29, 1975, at around 10:00 p.m., when Woz
finished building a prototype of his machine. He hit a few keys on
the keyboard—and letters appeared on the screen in front of him. It
was the sort of breakthrough moment that most of us can only
dream of. And he was alone when it happened.
Intentionally so. In his memoir, he offers this advice to kids who
aspire to great creativity:
Most inventors and engineers I’ve met are like me—they’re shy and they live in
their heads. They’re almost like artists. In fact, the very best of them are artists.
And artists work best alone where they can control an invention’s design
without a lot of other people designing it for marketing or some other
committee. I don’t believe anything really revolutionary has been invented by
committee. If you’re that rare engineer who’s an inventor and also an artist, I’m
going to give you some advice that might be hard to take. That advice is: Work
alone. You’re going to be best able to design revolutionary products and features if
you’re working on your own. Not on a committee. Not on a team.
From 1956 to 1962, an era best remembered for its ethos of
stultifying conformity, the Institute of Personality Assessment and
Research at the University of California, Berkeley, conducted a
series of studies on the nature of creativity. The researchers sought
to identify the most spectacularly creative people and then figure
out what made them different from everybody else. They assembled
a list of architects, mathematicians, scientists, engineers, and
writers who had made major contributions to their fields, and
invited them to Berkeley for a weekend of personality tests,
problem-solving experiments, and probing questions.
Then the researchers did something similar with members of the
same professions whose contributions were decidedly less
groundbreaking.
One of the most interesting findings, echoed by later studies, was
that the more creative people tended to be socially poised
introverts. They were interpersonally skilled but “not of an
especially sociable or participative temperament.” They described
themselves as independent and individualistic. As teens, many had
been shy and solitary.
These findings don’t mean that introverts are always more
creative than extroverts, but they do suggest that in a group of
people who have been extremely creative throughout their
lifetimes, you’re likely to find a lot of introverts. Why should this
be true? Do quiet personalities come with some ineffable quality
that fuels creativity? Perhaps, as we’ll see in chapter 6.
But there’s a less obvious yet surprisingly powerful explanation
for introverts’ creative advantage—an explanation that everyone
can learn from: introverts prefer to work independently, and solitude
can be a catalyst to innovation. As the influential psychologist Hans
Eysenck once observed, introversion “concentrates the mind on the
tasks in hand, and prevents the dissipation of energy on social and
sexual matters unrelated to work.” In other words, if you’re in the
backyard sitting under a tree while everyone else is clinking glasses
on the patio, you’re more likely to have an apple fall on your head.
(Newton was one of the world’s great introverts. William
Wordsworth described him as “A mind forever / Voyaging through
strange seas of Thought alone.”)
If this is true—if solitude is an important key to creativity—then we
might all want to develop a taste for it. We’d want to teach our kids
to work independently. We’d want to give employees plenty of
privacy and autonomy. Yet increasingly we do just the opposite.
We like to believe that we live in a grand age of creative
individualism. We look back at the midcentury era in which the
Berkeley researchers conducted their creativity studies, and feel
superior. Unlike the starched-shirted conformists of the 1950s, we
hang posters of Einstein on our walls, his tongue stuck out
iconoclastically. We consume indie music and films, and generate
our own online content. We “think different” (even if we got the
idea from Apple Computer’s famous ad campaign).
But the way we organize many of our most important institutions
—our schools and our workplaces—tells a very different story. It’s
the story of a contemporary phenomenon that I call the New
Groupthink—a phenomenon that has the potential to stifle
productivity at work and to deprive schoolchildren of the skills
they’ll need to achieve excellence in an increasingly competitive
world.
The New Groupthink elevates teamwork above all else. It insists
that creativity and intellectual achievement come from a gregarious
place. It has many powerful advocates. “Innovation—the heart of
the knowledge economy—is fundamentally social,” writes the
prominent journalist Malcolm Gladwell. “None of us is as smart as
all of us,” declares the organizational consultant Warren Bennis, in
his book Organizing Genius, whose opening chapter heralds the rise
of the “Great Group” and “The End of the Great Man.” “Many jobs
that we regard as the province of a single mind actually require a
crowd,” muses Clay Shirky in his influential book Here Comes
Everybody. Even “Michelangelo had assistants paint part of the
Sistine Chapel ceiling.” (Never mind that the assistants were likely
interchangeable, while Michelangelo was not.)
The New Groupthink is embraced by many corporations, which
increasingly organize workforces into teams, a practice that gained
popularity in the early 1990s. By 2000 an estimated half of all U.S.
organizations used teams, and today virtually all of them do,
according to the management professor Frederick Morgeson. A
recent survey found that 91 percent of high-level managers believe
that teams are the key to success. The consultant Stephen Harvill
told me that of the thirty major organizations he worked with in
2010, including J.C. Penney, Wells Fargo, Dell Computers, and
Prudential, he couldn’t think of a single one that didn’t use teams.
Some of these teams are virtual, working together from remote
locations, but others demand a tremendous amount of face-to-face
interaction, in the form of team-building exercises and retreats,
shared online calendars that announce employees’ availability for
meetings, and physical workplaces that afford little privacy. Today’s
employees inhabit open office plans, in which no one has a room of
his or her own, the only walls are the ones holding up the building,
and senior executives operate from the center of the boundary-less
floor along with everyone else. In fact, over 70 percent of today’s
employees work in an open plan; companies using them include
Procter & Gamble, Ernst & Young, GlaxoSmithKline, Alcoa, and H.J.
Heinz.
The amount of space per employee shrank from 500 square feet
in the 1970s to 200 square feet in 2010, according to Peter
Miscovich, a managing director at the real estate brokerage firm
Jones Lang LaSalle. “There has been a shift from ‘I’ to ‘we’ work,”
Steelcase CEO James Hackett told Fast Company magazine in 2005.
“Employees used to work alone in ‘I’ settings. Today, working in
teams and groups is highly valued. We are designing products to
facilitate that.” Rival office manufacturer Herman Miller, Inc., has
not only introduced new furniture designed to accommodate “the
move toward collaboration and teaming in the workplace” but also
moved its own top executives from private offices to an open space.
In 2006, the Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan
demolished a classroom building in part because it wasn’t set up for
maximum group interaction.
The New Groupthink is also practiced in our schools, via an
increasingly popular method of instruction called “cooperative” or
“small group” learning. In many elementary schools, the traditional
rows of seats facing the teacher have been replaced with “pods” of
four or more desks pushed together to facilitate countless group
learning activities. Even subjects like math and creative writing,
which would seem to depend on solo flights of thought, are often
taught as group projects. In one fourth-grade classroom I visited, a
big sign announced the “Rules for Group Work,” including,
YOU CAN’T
.
ASK A TEACHER FOR HELP UNLESS EVERYONE IN YOUR GROUP HAS THE SAME QUESTION
According to a 2002 nationwide survey of more than 1,200
fourth- and eighth-grade teachers, 55 percent of fourth-grade
teachers prefer cooperative learning, compared to only 26 percent
who favor teacher-directed formats. Only 35 percent of fourth-grade
and 29 percent of eighth-grade teachers spend more than half their
classroom time on traditional instruction, while 42 percent of
fourth-grade and 41 percent of eighth-grade teachers spend at least
a quarter of class time on group work. Among younger teachers,
small-group learning is even more popular, suggesting that the
trend will continue for some time to come.
The cooperative approach has politically progressive roots—the
theory is that students take ownership of their education when they
learn from one another—but according to elementary school
teachers I interviewed at public and private schools in New York,
Michigan, and Georgia, it also trains kids to express themselves in
the team culture of corporate America. “This style of teaching
reflects the business community,” one fifth-grade teacher in a
Manhattan public school told me, “where people’s respect for others
is based on their verbal abilities, not their originality or insight. You
have to be someone who speaks well and calls attention to yourself.
It’s an elitism based on something other than merit.” “Today the
world of business works in groups, so now the kids do it in school,”
a third-grade teacher in Decatur, Georgia, explained. “Cooperative
learning enables skills in working as teams—skills that are in dire
demand in the workplace,” writes the educational consultant Bruce
Williams.
Williams also identifies leadership training as a primary benefit of
cooperative learning. Indeed, the teachers I met seemed to pay
close attention to their students’ managerial skills. In one public
school I visited in downtown Atlanta, a third-grade teacher pointed
out a quiet student who likes to “do his own thing.” “But we put
him in charge of safety patrol one morning, so he got the chance to
be a leader, too,” she assured me.
This teacher was kind and well-intentioned, but I wonder whether
students like the young safety officer would be better off if we
appreciated that not everyone aspires to be a leader in the
conventional sense of the word—that some people wish to fit
harmoniously into the group, and others to be independent of it.
Often the most highly creative people are in the latter category. As
Janet Farrall and Leonie Kronborg write in Leadership Development
for the Gifted and Talented:
While extroverts tend to attain leadership in public domains, introverts tend to
attain leadership in theoretical and aesthetic fields. Outstanding introverted
leaders, such as Charles Darwin, Marie Curie, Patrick White and Arthur Boyd,
who have created either new fields of thought or rearranged existing knowledge,
have spent long periods of their lives in solitude. Hence leadership does not only
apply in social situations, but also occurs in more solitary situations such as
developing new techniques in the arts, creating new philosophies, writing
profound books and making scientific breakthroughs.
The New Groupthink did not arise at one precise moment.
Cooperative learning, corporate teamwork, and open office plans
emerged at different times and for different reasons. But the mighty
force that pulled these trends together was the rise of the World
Wide Web, which lent both cool and gravitas to the idea of
collaboration. On the Internet, wondrous creations were produced
via shared brainpower: Linux, the open-source operating system;
Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia; MoveOn.org, the grassroots
political movement. These collective productions, exponentially
greater than the sum of their parts, were so awe-inspiring that we
came to revere the hive mind, the wisdom of crowds, the miracle of
crowdsourcing. Collaboration became a sacred concept—the key
multiplier for success.
But then we took things a step further than the facts called for.
We came to value transparency and to knock down walls—not only
online but also in person. We failed to realize that what makes
sense for the asynchronous, relatively anonymous interactions of
the Internet might not work as well inside the face-to-face,
politically charged, acoustically noisy confines of an open-plan
office. Instead of distinguishing between online and in-person
interaction, we used the lessons of one to inform our thinking about
the other.
That’s why, when people talk about aspects of the New
Groupthink such as open office plans, they tend to invoke the
Internet. “Employees are putting their whole lives up on Facebook
and Twitter and everywhere else anyway. There’s no reason they
should hide behind a cubicle wall,” Dan Lafontaine, CFO of the
social marketing firm Mr. Youth, told NPR. Another management
consultant told me something similar: “An office wall is exactly
what it sounds like—a barrier. The fresher your methodologies of
thinking, the less you want boundaries. The companies who use
open office plans are new companies, just like the World Wide Web,
which is still a teenager.”
The Internet’s role in promoting face-to-face group work is
especially ironic because the early Web was a medium that enabled
bands of often introverted individualists—people much like the
solitude-craving thought leaders Farrall and Kronborg describe—to
come together to subvert and transcend the usual ways of problem-
solving. A significant majority of the earliest computer enthusiasts
were introverts, according to a study of 1,229 computer
professionals working in the U.S., the U.K., and Australia between
1982 and 1984. “It’s a truism in tech that open source attracts
introverts,” says Dave W. Smith, a consultant and software
developer in Silicon Valley, referring to the practice of producing
software by opening the source code to the online public and
allowing anyone to copy, improve upon, and distribute it. Many of
these people were motivated by a desire to contribute to the
broader good, and to see their achievements recognized by a
community they valued.
But the earliest open-source creators didn’t share office space—
often they didn’t even live in the same country. Their collaborations
took place largely in the ether. This is not an insignificant detail. If
you had gathered the same people who created Linux, installed
them in a giant conference room for a year, and asked them to
devise a new operating system, it’s doubtful that anything so
revolutionary would have occurred—for reasons we’ll explore in the
rest of this chapter.
When the research psychologist Anders Ericsson was fifteen, he took
up chess. He was pretty good at it, he thought, trouncing all his
classmates during lunchtime matches. Until one day a boy who’d
been one of the worst players in the class started to win every
match.
Ericsson wondered what had happened. “I really thought about
this a lot,” he recalls in an interview with Daniel Coyle, author of
The Talent Code. “Why could that boy, whom I had beaten so easily,
now beat me just as easily? I knew he was studying, going to a
chess club, but what had happened, really, underneath?”
This is the question that drives Ericsson’s career: How do
extraordinary achievers get to be so great at what they do? Ericsson
has searched for answers in fields as diverse as chess, tennis, and
classical piano.
In a now-famous experiment, he and his colleagues compared
three groups of expert violinists at the elite Music Academy in West
Berlin. The researchers asked the professors to divide the students
into three groups: the “best violinists,” who had the potential for
careers as international soloists; the “good violinists”; and a third
group training to be violin teachers rather than performers. Then
they interviewed the musicians and asked them to keep detailed
diaries of their time.
They found a striking difference among the groups. All three
groups spent the same amount of time—over fifty hours a week—
participating in music-related activities. All three had similar
classroom requirements making demands on their time. But the two
best groups spent most of their music-related time practicing in
solitude: 24.3 hours a week, or 3.5 hours a day, for the best group,
compared with only 9.3 hours a week, or 1.3 hours a day, for the
worst group. The best violinists rated “practice alone” as the most
important of all their music-related activities. Elite musicians—even
those who perform in groups—describe practice sessions with their
chamber group as “leisure” compared with solo practice, where the
real work gets done.
Ericsson and his cohorts found similar effects of solitude when
they studied other kinds of expert performers. “Serious study alone”
is the strongest predictor of skill for tournament-rated chess players,
for example; grandmasters typically spend a whopping five
thousand hours—almost five times as many hours as intermediate-
level players—studying the game by themselves during their first
ten years of learning to play. College students who tend to study
alone learn more over time than those who work in groups. Even
elite athletes in team sports often spend unusual amounts of time in
solitary practice.
What’s so magical about solitude? In many fields, Ericsson told
me, it’s only when you’re alone that you can engage in Deliberate
Practice, which he has identified as the key to exceptional
achievement. When you practice deliberately, you identify the tasks
or knowledge that are just out of your reach, strive to upgrade your
performance, monitor your progress, and revise accordingly.
Practice sessions that fall short of this standard are not only less
useful—they’re counterproductive. They reinforce existing cognitive
mechanisms instead of improving them.
Deliberate Practice is best conducted alone for several reasons. It
takes intense concentration, and other people can be distracting. It
requires deep motivation, often self-generated. But most important,
it involves working on the task that’s most challenging to you
personally. Only when you’re alone, Ericsson told me, can you “go
directly to the part that’s challenging to you. If you want to
improve what you’re doing, you have to be the one who generates
the move. Imagine a group class—you’re the one generating the
move only a small percentage of the time.”
To see Deliberate Practice in action, we need look no further than
the story of Stephen Wozniak. The Homebrew meeting was the
catalyst that inspired him to build that first PC, but the knowledge
base and work habits that made it possible came from another place
entirely: Woz had deliberately practiced engineering ever since he
was a little kid. (Ericsson says that it takes approximately ten
thousand hours of Deliberate Practice to gain true expertise, so it
helps to start young.)
In iWoz, Wozniak describes his childhood passion for electronics,
and unintentionally recounts all the elements of Deliberate Practice
that Ericsson emphasizes. First, he was motivated: his father, a
Lockheed engineer, had taught Woz that engineers could change
people’s lives and were “among the key people in the world.”
Second, he built his expertise step by painstaking step. Because he
entered countless science fairs, he says,
I acquired a central ability that was to help me through my entire career:
patience. I’m serious. Patience is usually so underrated. I mean, for all those
projects, from third grade all the way to eighth grade, I just learned things
gradually, figuring out how to put electronic devices together without so much
as cracking a book.… I learned to not worry so much about the outcome, but to
concentrate on the step I was on and to try to do it as perfectly as I could when I
was doing it.
Third, Woz often worked alone. This was not necessarily by
choice. Like many technically inclined kids, he took a painful
tumble down the social ladder when he got to junior high school. As
a boy he’d been admired for his science prowess, but now nobody
seemed to care. He hated small talk, and his interests were out of
step with those of his peers. A black-and-white photo from this
period shows Woz, hair closely cropped, grimacing intensely,
pointing proudly at his “science-fair-winning Adder/Subtractor,” a
boxlike contraption of wires, knobs, and gizmos. But the
awkwardness of those years didn’t deter him from pursuing his
dream; it probably nurtured it. He would never have learned so
much about computers, Woz says now, if he hadn’t been too shy to
leave the house.
No one would choose this sort of painful adolescence, but the fact
is that the solitude of Woz’s teens, and the single-minded focus on
what would turn out to be a lifelong passion, is typical for highly
creative people. According to the psychologist Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi, who between 1990 and 1995 studied the lives of
ninety-one exceptionally creative people in the arts, sciences,
business, and government, many of his subjects were on the social
margins during adolescence, partly because “intense curiosity or
focused interest seems odd to their peers.” Teens who are too
gregarious to spend time alone often fail to cultivate their talents
“because practicing music or studying math requires a solitude they
dread.” Madeleine L’Engle, the author of the classic young adult
novel A Wrinkle in Time and more than sixty other books, says that
she would never have developed into such a bold thinker had she
not spent so much of her childhood alone with books and ideas. As a
young boy, Charles Darwin made friends easily but preferred to
spend his time taking long, solitary nature walks. (As an adult he
was no different. “My dear Mr. Babbage,” he wrote to the famous
mathematician who had invited him to a dinner party, “I am very
much obliged to you for sending me cards for your parties, but I am
afraid of accepting them, for I should meet some people there, to
whom I have sworn by all the saints in Heaven, I never go out.”)
But exceptional performance depends not only on the groundwork
we lay through Deliberate Practice; it also requires the right
working conditions. And in contemporary workplaces, these are
surprisingly hard to come by.
One of the side benefits of being a consultant is getting intimate
access to many different work environments. Tom DeMarco, a
principal of the Atlantic Systems Guild team of consultants, had
walked around a good number of offices in his time, and he noticed
that some workspaces were a lot more densely packed than others.
He wondered what effect all that social interaction had on
performance.
To find out, DeMarco and his colleague Timothy Lister devised a
study called the Coding War Games. The purpose of the games was
to identify the characteristics of the best and worst computer
programmers; more than six hundred developers from ninety-two
different companies participated. Each designed, coded, and tested a
program, working in his normal office space during business hours.
Each participant was also assigned a partner from the same
company. The partners worked separately, however, without any
communication, a feature of the games that turned out to be
critical.
When the results came in, they revealed an enormous
performance gap. The best outperformed the worst by a 10:1 ratio.
The top programmers were also about 2.5 times better than the
median. When DeMarco and Lister tried to figure out what
accounted for this astonishing range, the factors that you’d think
would matter—such as years of experience, salary, even the time
spent completing the work—had little correlation to outcome.
Programmers with ten years’ experience did no better than those
with two years. The half who performed above the median earned
less than 10 percent more than the half below—even though they
were almost twice as good. The programmers who turned in “zero-
defect” work took slightly less, not more, time to complete the
exercise than those who made mistakes.
It was a mystery with one intriguing clue: programmers from the
same companies performed at more or less the same level, even
though they hadn’t worked together. That’s because top performers
overwhelmingly worked for companies that gave their workers the
most privacy, personal space, control over their physical
environments, and freedom from interruption. Sixty-two percent of
the best performers said that their workspace was acceptably
private, compared to only 19 percent of the worst performers; 76
percent of the worst performers but only 38 percent of the top
performers said that people often interrupted them needlessly.
The Coding War Games are well known in tech circles, but
DeMarco and Lister’s findings reach beyond the world of computer
programmers. A mountain of recent data on open-plan offices from
many different industries corroborates the results of the games.
Open-plan offices have been found to reduce productivity and
impair memory. They’re associated with high staff turnover. They
make people sick, hostile, unmotivated, and insecure. Open-plan
workers are more likely to suffer from high blood pressure and
elevated stress levels and to get the flu; they argue more with their
colleagues; they worry about coworkers eavesdropping on their
phone calls and spying on their computer screens. They have fewer
personal and confidential conversations with colleagues. They’re
often subject to loud and uncontrollable noise, which raises heart
rates; releases cortisol, the body’s fight-or-fiight “stress” hormone;
and makes people socially distant, quick to anger, aggressive, and
slow to help others.
Indeed, excessive stimulation seems to impede learning: a recent
study found that people learn better after a quiet stroll through the
woods than after a noisy walk down a city street. Another study, of
38,000 knowledge workers across different sectors, found that the
simple act of being interrupted is one of the biggest barriers to
productivity. Even multitasking, that prized feat of modern-day
office warriors, turns out to be a myth. Scientists now know that the
brain is incapable of paying attention to two things at the same
time. What looks like multitasking is really switching back and
forth between multiple tasks, which reduces productivity and
increases mistakes by up to 50 percent.
Many introverts seem to know these things instinctively, and
resist being herded together. Backbone Entertainment, a video
game design company in Oakland, California, initially used an open
office plan but found that their game developers, many of whom
were introverts, were unhappy. “It was one big warehouse space,
with just tables, no walls, and everyone could see each other,”
recalls Mike Mika, the former creative director. “We switched over
to cubicles and were worried about it—you’d think in a creative
environment that people would hate that. But it turns out they
prefer having nooks and crannies they can hide away in and just be
away from everybody.”
Something similar happened at Reebok International when, in
2000, the company consolidated 1,250 employees in their new
headquarters in Canton, Massachusetts. The managers assumed that
their shoe designers would want office space with plenty of access
to each other so they could brainstorm (an idea they probably
picked up when they were getting their MBAs). Luckily, they
consulted first with the shoe designers themselves, who told them
that actually what they needed was peace and quiet so they could
concentrate.
This would not have come as news to Jason Fried, cofounder of
the web application company 37signals. For ten years, beginning in
2000, Fried asked hundreds of people (mostly designers,
programmers, and writers) where they liked to work when they
needed to get something done. He found that they went anywhere
but their offices, which were too noisy and full of interruptions.
That’s why, of Fried’s sixteen employees, only eight live in Chicago,
where 37signals is based, and even they are not required to show up
for work, even for meetings. Especially not for meetings, which
Fried views as “toxic.” Fried is not anti-collaboration—37signals’
home page touts its products’ ability to make collaboration
productive and pleasant. But he prefers passive forms of
collaboration like e-mail, instant messaging, and online chat tools.
His advice for other employers? “Cancel your next meeting,” he
advises. “Don’t reschedule it. Erase it from memory.” He also
suggests “No-Talk Thursdays,” one day a week in which employees
aren’t allowed to speak to each other.
The people Fried interviewed were saying out loud what creative
people have always known. Kafka, for example, couldn’t bear to be
near even his adoring fiancée while he worked:
You once said that you would like to sit beside me while I write. Listen, in that
case I could not write at all. For writing means revealing oneself to excess; that
utmost of self-revelation and surrender, in which a human being, when
involved with others, would feel he was losing himself, and from which,
therefore, he will always shrink as long as he is in his right mind.… That is why
one can never be alone enough when one writes, why there can never be
enough silence around one when one writes, why even night is not night
enough.
Even the considerably more cheerful Theodor Geisel (otherwise
known as Dr. Seuss) spent his workdays ensconced in his private
studio, the walls lined with sketches and drawings, in a bell-tower
outside his La Jolla, California, house. Geisel was a much more
quiet man than his jocular rhymes suggest. He rarely ventured out
in public to meet his young readership, fretting that kids would
expect a merry, outspoken, Cat in the Hat–like figure, and would be
disappointed with his reserved personality. “In mass, [children]
terrify me,” he admitted.
If personal space is vital to creativity, so is freedom from “peer
pressure.” Consider the story of the legendary advertising man Alex
Osborn. Today Osborn’s name rings few bells, but during the first
half of the twentieth century he was the kind of larger-than-life
renaissance man who mesmerized his contemporaries. Osborn was a
founding partner of the advertising agency Batten, Barton, Durstine,
and Osborn (BBDO), but it was as an author that he really made his
mark, beginning with the day in 1938 that a magazine editor
invited him to lunch and asked what his hobby was.
“Imagination,” replied Osborn.
“Mr. Osborn,” said the editor, “you must do a book on that. It’s a
job that has been waiting to be done all these years. There is no
subject of greater importance. You must give it the time and energy
and thoroughness it deserves.”
And so Mr. Osborn did. He wrote several books during the 1940s
and 1950s, in fact, each tackling a problem that had vexed him in
his capacity as head of BBDO: his employees were not creative
enough. They had good ideas, Osborn believed, but were loath to
share them for fear of their colleagues’ judgment.
For Osborn, the solution was not to have his employees work
alone, but rather to remove the threat of criticism from group work.
He invented the concept of brainstorming, a process in which group
members generate ideas in a nonjudgmental atmosphere.
Brainstorming had four rules:
1. Don’t judge or criticize ideas.
2. Be freewheeling. The wilder the idea, the better.
3. Go for quantity. The more ideas you have, the better.
4. Build on the ideas of fellow group members.
Osborn believed passionately that groups—once freed from the
shackles of social judgment—produced more and better ideas than
did individuals working in solitude, and he made grand claims for
his favored method. “The quantitative results of group
brainstorming are beyond question,” he wrote. “One group
produced 45 suggestions for a home-appliance promotion, 56 ideas
for a money-raising campaign, 124 ideas on how to sell more
blankets. In another case, 15 groups brainstormed one and the same
problem and produced over 800 ideas.”
Osborn’s theory had great impact, and company leaders took up
brainstorming with enthusiasm. To this day, it’s common for anyone
who spends time in corporate America to find himself occasionally
cooped up with colleagues in a room full of whiteboards, markers,
and a preternaturally peppy facilitator encouraging everyone to
free-associate.
There’s only one problem with Osborn’s breakthrough idea: group
brainstorming doesn’t actually work. One of the first studies to
demonstrate this was conducted in 1963. Marvin Dunnette, a
psychology professor at the University of Minnesota, gathered
forty-eight research scientists and forty-eight advertising executives,
all of them male employees of Minnesota Mining and
Manufacturing (otherwise known as 3M, inventors of the Post-it),
and asked them to participate in both solitary and group
brainstorming sessions. Dunnette was confident that the executives
would benefit from the group process. He was less sure that the
research scientists, whom he considered more introverted, would
profit from group work.
Dunnette divided each set of forty-eight men into twelve groups
of four. Each foursome was given a problem to brainstorm, such as
the benefits or difficulties that would arise from being born with an
extra thumb. Each man was also given a similar problem to
brainstorm on his own. Then Dunnette and his team counted all the
ideas, comparing those produced by the groups with those
generated by people working individually. In order to compare
apples with apples, Dunnette pooled the ideas of each individual
together with those of three other individuals, as if they had been
working in “nominal” groups of four. The researchers also measured
the quality of the ideas, rating them on a “Probability Scale” of 0
through 4.
The results were unambiguous. The men in twenty-three of the
twenty-four groups produced more ideas when they worked on their
own than when they worked as a group. They also produced ideas
of equal or higher quality when working individually. And the
advertising executives were no better at group work than the
presumably introverted research scientists.
Since then, some forty years of research has reached the same
startling conclusion. Studies have shown that performance gets
worse as group size increases: groups of nine generate fewer and
poorer ideas compared to groups of six, which do worse than groups
of four. The “evidence from science suggests that business people
must be insane to use brainstorming groups,” writes the
organizational psychologist Adrian Furnham. “If you have talented
and motivated people, they should be encouraged to work alone
when creativity or efficiency is the highest priority.”
The one exception to this is online brainstorming. Groups
brainstorming electronically, when properly managed, not only do
better than individuals, research shows; the larger the group, the
better it performs. The same is true of academic research—
professors who work together electronically, from different physical
locations, tend to produce research that is more influential than
those either working alone or collaborating face-to-face.
This shouldn’t surprise us; as we’ve said, it was the curious power
of electronic collaboration that contributed to the New Groupthink
in the first place. What created Linux, or Wikipedia, if not a gigantic
electronic brainstorming session? But we’re so impressed by the
power of online collaboration that we’ve come to overvalue all
group work at the expense of solo thought. We fail to realize that
participating in an online working group is a form of solitude all its
own. Instead we assume that the success of online collaborations
will be replicated in the face-to-face world.
Indeed, after all these years of evidence that conventional
brainstorming groups don’t work, they remain as popular as ever.
Participants in brainstorming sessions usually believe that their
group performed much better than it actually did, which points to a
valuable reason for their continued popularity—group
brainstorming makes people feel attached. A worthy goal, so long
as we understand that social glue, as opposed to creativity, is the
principal benefit.
Psychologists usually offer three explanations for the failure of
group brainstorming. The first is social loafing: in a group, some
individuals tend to sit back and let others do the work. The second
is production blocking: only one person can talk or produce an idea at
once, while the other group members are forced to sit passively.
And the third is evaluation apprehension, meaning the fear of looking
stupid in front of one’s peers.
Osborn’s “rules” of brainstorming were meant to neutralize this
anxiety, but studies show that the fear of public humiliation is a
potent force. During the 1988–89 basketball season, for example,
two NCAA basketball teams played eleven games without any
spectators, owing to a measles outbreak that led their schools to
quarantine all students. Both teams played much better (higher free-
throw percentages, for example) without any fans, even adoring
home-team fans, to unnerve them.
The behavioral economist Dan Ariely noticed a similar
phenomenon when he conducted a study asking thirty-nine
participants to solve anagram puzzles, either alone at their desks or
with others watching. Ariely predicted that the participants would
do better in public because they’d be more motivated. But they
performed worse. An audience may be rousing, but it’s also
stressful.
The problem with evaluation apprehension is that there’s not
much we can do about it. You’d think you could overcome it with
will or training or a set of group process rules like Alex Osborn’s.
But recent research in neuroscience suggests that the fear of
judgment runs much deeper and has more far-reaching implications
than we ever imagined.
Between 1951 and 1956, just as Osborn was promoting the power
of group brainstorming, a psychologist named Solomon Asch
conducted a series of now-famous experiments on the dangers of
group influence. Asch gathered student volunteers into groups and
had them take a vision test. He showed them a picture of three lines
of varying lengths and asked questions about how the lines
compared with one another: which was longer, which one matched
the length of a fourth line, and so on. His questions were so simple
that 95 percent of students answered every question correctly.
But when Asch planted actors in the groups, and the actors
confidently volunteered the same incorrect answer, the number of
students who gave all correct answers plunged to 25 percent. That
is, a staggering 75 percent of the participants went along with the
group’s wrong answer to at least one question.
The Asch experiments demonstrated the power of conformity at
exactly the time that Osborn was trying to release us from its
chains. What they didn’t tell us was why we were so prone to
conform. What was going on in the minds of the kowtowers? Had
their perception of the lines’ lengths been altered by peer pressure,
or did they knowingly give wrong answers for fear of being the odd
one out? For decades, psychologists puzzled over this question.
Today, with the help of brain-scanning technology, we may be
getting closer to the answer. In 2005 an Emory University
neuroscientist named Gregory Berns decided to conduct an updated
version of Asch’s experiments. Berns and his team recruited thirty-
two volunteers, men and women between the ages of nineteen and
forty-one. The volunteers played a game in which each group
member was shown two different three-dimensional objects on a
computer screen and asked to decide whether the first object could
be rotated to match the second. The experimenters used an fMRI
scanner to take snapshots of the volunteers’ brains as they
conformed to or broke with group opinion.
The results were both disturbing and illuminating. First, they
corroborated Asch’s findings. When the volunteers played the game
on their own, they gave the wrong answer only 13.8 percent of the
time. But when they played with a group whose members gave
unanimously wrong answers, they agreed with the group 41 percent
of the time.
But Berns’s study also shed light on exactly why we’re such
conformists. When the volunteers played alone, the brain scans
showed activity in a network of brain regions including the occipital
cortex and parietal cortex, which are associated with visual and
spatial perception, and in the frontal cortex, which is associated
with conscious decision-making. But when they went along with
their group’s wrong answer, their brain activity revealed something
very different.
Remember, what Asch wanted to know was whether people
conformed despite knowing that the group was wrong, or whether
their perceptions had been altered by the group. If the former was
true, Berns and his team reasoned, then they should see more brain
activity in the decision-making prefrontal cortex. That is, the brain
scans would pick up the volunteers deciding consciously to abandon
their own beliefs to fit in with the group. But if the brain scans
showed heightened activity in regions associated with visual and
spatial perception, this would suggest that the group had somehow
managed to change the individual’s perceptions.
That was exactly what happened—the conformists showed less
brain activity in the frontal, decision-making regions and more in
the areas of the brain associated with perception. Peer pressure, in
other words, is not only unpleasant, but can actually change your
view of a problem.
These early findings suggest that groups are like mind-altering
substances. If the group thinks the answer is A, you’re much more
likely to believe that A is correct, too. It’s not that you’re saying
consciously, “Hmm, I’m not sure, but they all think the answer’s A,
so I’ll go with that.” Nor are you saying, “I want them to like me, so
I’ll just pretend that the answer’s A.” No, you are doing something
much more unexpected—and dangerous. Most of Berns’s volunteers
reported having gone along with the group because “they thought
that they had arrived serendipitously at the same correct answer.”
They were utterly blind, in other words, to how much their peers
had influenced them.
What does this have to do with social fear? Well, remember that
the volunteers in the Asch and Berns studies didn’t always conform.
Sometimes they picked the right answer despite their peers’
influence. And Berns and his team found something very interesting
about these moments. They were linked to heightened activation in
the amygdala, a small organ in the brain associated with upsetting
emotions such as the fear of rejection.
Berns refers to this as “the pain of independence,” and it has
serious implications. Many of our most important civic institutions,
from elections to jury trials to the very idea of majority rule,
depend on dissenting voices. But when the group is literally capable
of changing our perceptions, and when to stand alone is to activate
primitive, powerful, and unconscious feelings of rejection, then the
health of these institutions seems far more vulnerable than we
think.
But of course I’ve been simplifying the case against face-to-face
collaboration. Steve Wozniak collaborated with Steve Jobs, after all;
without their pairing, there would be no Apple today. Every pair
bond between mother and father, between parent and child, is an
act of creative collaboration. Indeed, studies show that face-to-face
interactions create trust in a way that online interactions can’t.
Research also suggests that population density is correlated with
innovation; despite the advantages of quiet walks in the woods,
people in crowded cities benefit from the web of interactions that
urban life offers.
I have experienced this phenomenon personally. When I was
getting ready to write this book, I carefully set up my home office,
complete with uncluttered desk, file cabinets, free counter space,
and plenty of natural light—and then felt too cut off from the world
to type a single keystroke there. Instead, I wrote most of this book
on a laptop at my favorite densely packed neighborhood café. I did
this for exactly the reasons that champions of the New Groupthink
might suggest: the mere presence of other people helped my mind
to make associative leaps. The coffee shop was full of people bent
over their own computers, and if the expressions of rapt
concentration on their faces were any indication, I wasn’t the only
one getting a lot of work done.
But the café worked as my office because it had specific attributes
that are absent from many modern schools and workplaces. It was
social, yet its casual, come-and-go-as-you-please nature left me free
from unwelcome entanglements and able to “deliberately practice”
my writing. I could toggle back and forth between observer and
social actor as much as I wanted. I could also control my
environment. Each day I chose the location of my table—in the
center of the room or along the perimeter—depending on whether I
wanted to be seen as well as to see. And I had the option to leave
whenever I wanted peace and quiet to edit what I’d written that
day. Usually I was ready to exercise this right after only a few hours
—not the eight, ten, or fourteen hours that many office dwellers put
in.
The way forward, I’m suggesting, is not to stop collaborating
face-to-face, but to refine the way we do it. For one thing, we
should actively seek out symbiotic introvert-extrovert relationships,
in which leadership and other tasks are divided according to
people’s natural strengths and temperaments. The most effective
teams are composed of a healthy mix of introverts and extroverts,
studies show, and so are many leadership structures.
We also need to create settings in which people are free to
circulate in a shifting kaleidoscope of interactions, and to disappear
into their private workspaces when they want to focus or simply be
alone. Our schools should teach children the skills to work with
others—cooperative learning can be effective when practiced well
and in moderation—but also the time and training they need to
deliberately practice on their own. It’s also vital to recognize that
many people—especially introverts like Steve Wozniak—need extra
quiet and privacy in order to do their best work.
Some companies are starting to understand the value of silence
and solitude, and are creating “flexible” open plans that offer a mix
of solo workspaces, quiet zones, casual meeting areas, cafés,
reading rooms, computer hubs, and even “streets” where people can
chat casually with each other without interrupting others’ workflow.
At Pixar Animation Studios, the sixteen-acre campus is built around
a football-field-sized atrium housing mailboxes, a cafeteria, and
even bathrooms. The idea is to encourage as many casual, chance
encounters as possible. At the same time, employees are encouraged
to make their individual offices, cubicles, desks, and work areas
their own and to decorate them as they wish. Similarly, at
Microsoft, many employees enjoy their own private offices, yet they
come with sliding doors, movable walls, and other features that
allow occupants to decide when they want to collaborate and when
they need private time to think. These kinds of diverse workspaces
benefit introverts as well as extroverts, the systems design
researcher Matt Davis told me, because they offer more spaces to
retreat to than traditional open-plan offices.
I suspect that Wozniak himself would approve of these
developments. Before he created the Apple PC, Woz designed
calculators at Hewlett-Packard, a job he loved in part because HP
made it so easy to chat with others. Every day at 10:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. management wheeled in donuts and coffee, and people
would socialize and swap ideas. What set these interactions apart
was how low-key and relaxed they were. In iWoz, he recalls HP as a
meritocracy where it didn’t matter what you looked like, where
there was no premium on playing social games, and where no one
pushed him from his beloved engineering work into management.
That was what collaboration meant for Woz: the ability to share a
donut and a brainwave with his laid-back, nonjudgmental, poorly
dressed colleagues—who minded not a whit when he disappeared
into his cubicle to get the real work done.