Part
TWO
YOUR BIOLOGY, YOUR SELF?
IS TEMPERAMENT DESTINY?
Nature, Nurture, and the Orchid Hypothesis
Some people are more certain of everything than I am of anything.
—ROBERT RUBIN, In an Uncertain World
ALMOST TEN YEARS AGO
It’s 2:00 a.m., I can’t sleep, and I want to die.
I’m not normally the suicidal type, but this is the night before a
big speech, and my mind races with horrifying what-if propositions.
What if my mouth dries up and I can’t get any words out? What if I
bore the audience? What if I throw up onstage?
My boyfriend (now my husband), Ken, watches me toss and turn.
He’s bewildered by my distress. A former UN peacekeeper, he once
was ambushed in Somalia, yet I don’t think he felt as scared then as
I do now.
“Try to think of happy things,” he says, caressing my forehead.
I stare at the ceiling, tears welling. What happy things? Who
could be happy in a world of podiums and microphones?
“There are a billion people in China who don’t give a rat’s ass
about your speech,” Ken offers sympathetically.
This helps, for approximately five seconds. I turn over and watch
the alarm clock. Finally it’s six thirty. At least the worst part, the
night-before part, is over; this time tomorrow, I’ll be free. But first I
have to get through today. I dress grimly and put on a coat. Ken
hands me a sports water bottle filled with Baileys Irish Cream. I’m
not a big drinker, but I like Baileys because it tastes like a chocolate
milkshake. “Drink this fifteen minutes before you go on,” he says,
kissing me good-bye.
I take the elevator downstairs and settle into the car that waits to
ferry me to my destination, a big corporate headquarters in
suburban New Jersey. The drive gives me plenty of time to wonder
how I allowed myself to get into this situation. I recently left my
job as a Wall Street lawyer to start my own consulting firm. Mostly
I’ve worked one-on-one or in small groups, which feels comfortable.
But when an acquaintance who is general counsel at a big media
company asked me to run a seminar for his entire executive team, I
agreed—enthusiastically, even!—for reasons I can’t fathom now. I
find myself praying for calamity—a flood or a small earthquake,
maybe—anything so I don’t have to go through with this. Then I
feel guilty for involving the rest of the city in my drama.
The car pulls up at the client’s office and I step out, trying to
project the peppy self-assurance of a successful consultant. The
event organizer escorts me to the auditorium. I ask for directions to
the bathroom, and, in the privacy of the stall, gulp from the water
bottle. For a few moments I stand still, waiting for the alcohol to
work its magic. But nothing happens—I’m still terrified. Maybe I
should take another swig. No, it’s only nine in the morning—what if
they smell the liquor on my breath? I reapply my lipstick and make
my way back to the event room, where I arrange my notecards at
the podium as the room fills with important-looking businesspeople.
Whatever you do, try not to vomit, I tell myself.
Some of the executives glance up at me, but most of them stare
fixedly at their BlackBerrys. Clearly, I’m taking them away from
very pressing work. How am I going to hold their attention long
enough for them to stop pounding out urgent communiqués into
their tiny typewriters? I vow, right then and there, that I will never
make another speech.
Well, since then I’ve given plenty of them. I haven’t completely
overcome my anxiety, but over the years I’ve discovered strategies
that can help anyone with stage fright who needs to speak in public.
More about that in chapter 5.
In the meantime, I’ve told you my tale of abject terror because it
lies at the heart of some of my most urgent questions about
introversion. On some deep level, my fear of public speaking seems
connected to other aspects of my personality that I appreciate,
especially my love of all things gentle and cerebral. This strikes me
as a not-uncommon constellation of traits. But are they truly
connected, and if so, how? Are they the result of “nurture”—the
way I was raised? Both of my parents are soft-spoken, reflective
types; my mother hates public speaking too. Or are they my
“nature”—something deep in my genetic makeup?
I’ve been puzzling over these questions for my entire adult life.
Fortunately, so have researchers at Harvard, where scientists are
probing the human brain in an attempt to discover the biological
origins of human temperament.
One such scientist is an eighty-two-year-old man named Jerome
Kagan, one of the great developmental psychologists of the
twentieth century. Kagan devoted his career to studying the
emotional and cognitive development of children. In a series of
groundbreaking longitudinal studies, he followed children from
infancy through adolescence, documenting their physiologies and
personalities along the way. Longitudinal studies like these are
time-consuming, expensive, and therefore rare—but when they pay
off, as Kagan’s did, they pay off big.
For one of those studies, launched in 1989 and still ongoing,
Professor Kagan and his team gathered five hundred four-month-old
infants in his Laboratory for Child Development at Harvard,
predicting they’d be able to tell, on the strength of a forty-five-
minute evaluation, which babies were more likely to turn into
introverts or extroverts. If you’ve seen a four-month-old baby
lately, this may seem an audacious claim. But Kagan had been
studying temperament for a long time, and he had a theory.
Kagan and his team exposed the four-month-olds to a carefully
chosen set of new experiences. The infants heard tape-recorded
voices and balloons popping, saw colorful mobiles dance before
their eyes, and inhaled the scent of alcohol on cotton swabs. They
had wildly varying reactions to the new stimuli. About 20 percent
cried lustily and pumped their arms and legs. Kagan called this
group “high-reactive.” About 40 percent stayed quiet and placid,
moving their arms or legs occasionally, but without all the dramatic
limb-pumping. This group Kagan called “low-reactive.” The
remaining 40 percent fell between these two extremes. In a
startlingly counterintuitive hypothesis, Kagan predicted that it was
the infants in the high-reactive group—the lusty arm-pumpers—who
were most likely to grow into quiet teenagers.
When they were two, four, seven, and eleven years old, many of
the children returned to Kagan’s lab for follow-up testing of their
reactions to new people and events. At the age of two, the children
met a lady wearing a gas mask and a lab coat, a man dressed in a
clown costume, and a radio-controlled robot. At seven, they were
asked to play with kids they’d never met before. At eleven, an
unfamiliar adult interviewed them about their personal lives.
Kagan’s team observed how the children reacted to these strange
situations, noting their body language and recording how often and
spontaneously they laughed, talked, and smiled. They also
interviewed the kids and their parents about what the children were
like outside the laboratory. Did they prefer one or two close friends
to a merry band? Did they like visiting new places? Were they risk-
takers or were they more cautious? Did they consider themselves
shy or bold?
Many of the children turned out exactly as Kagan had expected.
The high-reactive infants, the 20 percent who’d hollered at the
mobiles bobbing above their heads, were more likely to have
developed serious, careful personalities. The low-reactive infants—
the quiet ones—were more likely to have become relaxed and
confident types. High and low reactivity tended to correspond, in
other words, to introversion and extroversion. As Kagan mused in
his 1998 book, Galen’s Prophecy, “Carl Jung’s descriptions of the
introvert and extrovert, written over seventy-five years ago, apply
with uncanny accuracy to a proportion of our high- and low-reactive
adolescents.”
Kagan describes two of those adolescents—reserved Tom and
extroverted Ralph—and the differences between the two are
striking. Tom, who was unusually shy as a child, is good at school,
watchful and quiet, devoted to his girlfriend and parents, prone to
worry, and loves learning on his own and thinking about
intellectual problems. He plans to be a scientist. “Like … other
famous introverts who were shy children,” writes Kagan, comparing
Tom to T. S. Eliot and the mathematician-philosopher Alfred North
Whitehead, Tom “has chosen a life of the mind.”
Ralph, in contrast, is relaxed and self-assured. He engages the
interviewer from Kagan’s team as a peer, not as an authority figure
twenty-five years his senior. Though Ralph is very bright, he
recently failed his English and science classes because he’d been
goofing around. But nothing much bothers Ralph. He admits his
flaws cheerfully.
Psychologists often discuss the difference between “temperament”
and “personality.” Temperament refers to inborn, biologically based
behavioral and emotional patterns that are observable in infancy
and early childhood; personality is the complex brew that emerges
after cultural influence and personal experience are thrown into the
mix. Some say that temperament is the foundation, and personality
is the building. Kagan’s work helped link certain infant
temperaments with adolescent personality styles like those of Tom
and Ralph.
But how did Kagan know that the arm-thrashing infants would
likely turn into cautious, reflective teens like Tom, or that the quiet
babies were more likely to become forthright, too-cool-for-school
Ralphs? The answer lies in their physiologies.
In addition to observing the children’s behaviors in strange
situations, Kagan’s team measured their heart rates, blood pressure,
finger temperature, and other properties of the nervous system.
Kagan chose these measures because they’re believed to be
controlled by a potent organ inside the brain called the amygdala.
The amygdala is located deep in the limbic system, an ancient brain
network found even in primitive animals like mice and rats. This
network—sometimes called the “emotional brain”—underlies many
of the basic instincts we share with these animals, such as appetite,
sex drive, and fear.
The amygdala serves as the brain’s emotional switchboard,
receiving information from the senses and then signaling the rest of
the brain and nervous system how to respond. One of its functions
is to instantly detect new or threatening things in the environment
—from an airborne Frisbee to a hissing serpent—and send rapid-fire
signals through the body that trigger the fight-or-fiight response.
When the Frisbee looks like it’s headed straight for your nose, it’s
your amygdala that tells you to duck. When the rattlesnake
prepares to bite, it’s the amygdala that makes sure you run.
Kagan hypothesized that infants born with an especially excitable
amygdala would wiggle and howl when shown unfamiliar objects—
and grow up to be children who were more likely to feel vigilant
when meeting new people. And this is just what he found. In other
words, the four-month-olds who thrashed their arms like punk
rockers did so not because they were extroverts in the making, but
because their little bodies reacted strongly—they were “high-
reactive”—to new sights, sounds, and smells. The quiet infants were
silent not because they were future introverts—just the opposite—
but because they had nervous systems that were unmoved by
novelty.
The more reactive a child’s amygdala, the higher his heart rate is
likely to be, the more widely dilated his eyes, the tighter his vocal
cords, the more cortisol (a stress hormone) in his saliva—the more
jangled he’s likely to feel when he confronts something new and
stimulating. As high-reactive infants grow up, they continue to
confront the unknown in many different contexts, from visiting an
amusement park for the first time to meeting new classmates on the
first day of kindergarten. We tend to notice most a child’s reaction
to unfamiliar people—how does he behave on the first day of
school? Does she seem uncertain at birthday parties full of kids she
doesn’t know? But what we’re really observing is a child’s
sensitivity to novelty in general, not just to people.
High- and low-reactivity are probably not the only biological
routes to introversion and extroversion. There are plenty of
introverts who do not have the sensitivity of a classic high-reactive,
and a small percentage of high-reactives grow up to be extroverts.
Still, Kagan’s decades-long series of discoveries mark a dramatic
breakthrough in our understanding of these personality styles—
including the value judgments we make. Extroverts are sometimes
credited with being “pro-social”—meaning caring about others—and
introverts disparaged as people who don’t like people. But the
reactions of the infants in Kagan’s tests had nothing to do with
people. These babies were shouting (or not shouting) over Q-tips.
They were pumping their limbs (or staying calm) in response to
popping balloons. The high-reactive babies were not misanthropes
in the making; they were simply sensitive to their environments.
Indeed, the sensitivity of these children’s nervous systems seems
to be linked not only to noticing scary things, but to noticing in
general. High-reactive children pay what one psychologist calls
“alert attention” to people and things. They literally use more eye
movements than others to compare choices before making a
decision. It’s as if they process more deeply—sometimes
consciously, sometimes not—the information they take in about the
world. In one early series of studies, Kagan asked a group of first-
graders to play a visual matching game. Each child was shown a
picture of a teddy bear sitting on a chair, alongside six other similar
pictures, only one of which was an exact match. The high-reactive
children spent more time than others considering all the
alternatives, and were more likely to make the right choice. When
Kagan asked these same kids to play word games, he found that
they also read more accurately than impulsive children did.
High-reactive kids also tend to think and feel deeply about what
they’ve noticed, and to bring an extra degree of nuance to everyday
experiences. This can be expressed in many different ways. If the
child is socially oriented, she may spend a lot of time pondering her
observations of others—why Jason didn’t want to share his toys
today, why Mary got so mad at Nicholas when he bumped into her
accidentally. If he has a particular interest—in solving puzzles,
making art, building sand castles—he’ll often concentrate with
unusual intensity. If a high-reactive toddler breaks another child’s
toy by mistake, studies show, she often experiences a more intense
mix of guilt and sorrow than a lower-reactive child would. All kids
notice their environments and feel emotions, of course, but high-
reactive kids seem to see and feel things more. If you ask a high-
reactive seven-year-old how a group of kids should share a coveted
toy, writes the science journalist Winifred Gallagher, he’ll tend to
come up with sophisticated strategies like “Alphabetize their last
names, and let the person closest to A go first.”
“Putting theory into practice is hard for them,” writes Gallagher,
“because their sensitive natures and elaborate schemes are unsuited
to the heterogeneous rigors of the schoolyard.” Yet as we’ll see in
the chapters to come, these traits—alertness, sensitivity to nuance,
complex emotionality—turn out to be highly underrated powers.
Kagan has given us painstakingly documented evidence that high
reactivity is one biological basis of introversion (we’ll explore
another likely route in chapter 7), but his findings are powerful in
part because they confirm what we’ve sensed all along. Some of
Kagan’s studies even venture into the realm of cultural myth. For
example, he believes, based on his data, that high reactivity is
associated with physical traits such as blue eyes, allergies, and hay
fever, and that high-reactive men are more likely than others to
have a thin body and narrow face. Such conclusions are speculative
and call to mind the nineteenth-century practice of divining a man’s
soul from the shape of his skull. But whether or not they turn out to
be accurate, it’s interesting that these are just the physical
characteristics we give fictional characters when we want to suggest
that they’re quiet, introverted, cerebral. It’s as if these physiological
tendencies are buried deep in our cultural unconscious.
Take Disney movies, for example: Kagan and his colleagues
speculate that Disney animators unconsciously understood high
reactivity when they drew sensitive figures like Cinderella,
Pinocchio, and Dopey with blue eyes, and brasher characters like
Cinderella’s stepsisters, Grumpy, and Peter Pan with darker eyes. In
many books, Hollywood films, and TV shows, too, the stock
character of a reedy, nose-blowing young man is shorthand for the
hapless but thoughtful kid who gets good grades, is a bit
overwhelmed by the social whirl, and is talented at introspective
activities like poetry or astrophysics. (Think Ethan Hawke in Dead
Poets Society.) Kagan even speculates that some men prefer women
with fair skin and blue eyes because they unconsciously code them
as sensitive.
Other studies of personality also support the premise that
extroversion and introversion are physiologically, even genetically,
based. One of the most common ways of untangling nature from
nurture is to compare the personality traits of identical and fraternal
twins. Identical twins develop from a single fertilized egg and
therefore have exactly the same genes, while fraternal twins come
from separate eggs and share only 50 percent of their genes on
average. So if you measure introversion or extroversion levels in
pairs of twins and find more correlation in identical twins than in
fraternal pairs—which scientists do, in study after study, even of
twins raised in separate households—you can reasonably conclude
that the trait has some genetic basis.
None of these studies is perfect, but the results have consistently
suggested that introversion and extroversion, like other major
personality traits such as agreeableness and conscientiousness, are
about 40 to 50 percent heritable.
But are biological explanations for introversion wholly satisfying?
When I first read Kagan’s book Galen’s Prophecy, I was so excited
that I couldn’t sleep. Here, inside these pages, were my friends, my
family, myself—all of humanity, in fact!—neatly sorted through the
prism of a quiescent nervous system versus a reactive one. It was as
if centuries of philosophical inquiry into the mystery of human
personality had led to this shining moment of scientific clarity.
There was an easy answer to the nature-nurture question after all—
we are born with prepackaged temperaments that powerfully shape
our adult personalities.
But it couldn’t be that simple—could it? Can we really reduce an
introverted or extroverted personality to the nervous system its
owner was born with? I would guess that I inherited a high-reactive
nervous system, but my mother insists I was an easy baby, not the
kind to kick and wail over a popped balloon. I’m prone to wild
flights of self-doubt, but I also have a deep well of courage in my
own convictions. I feel horribly uncomfortable on my first day in a
foreign city, but I love to travel. I was shy as a child, but have
outgrown the worst of it. Furthermore, I don’t think these
contradictions are so unusual; many people have dissonant aspects
to their personalities. And people change profoundly over time,
don’t they? What about free will—do we have no control over who
we are, and whom we become?
I decided to track down Professor Kagan to ask him these
questions in person. I felt drawn to him not only because his
research findings were so compelling, but also because of what he
represents in the great nature-nurture debate. He’d launched his
career in 1954 staunchly on the side of nurture, a view in step with
the scientific establishment of the day. Back then, the idea of inborn
temperament was political dynamite, evoking the specter of Nazi
eugenics and white supremacism. By contrast, the notion of children
as blank slates for whom anything was possible appealed to a nation
built on democracy.
But Kagan had changed his mind along the way. “I have been
dragged, kicking and screaming, by my data,” he says now, “to
acknowledge that temperament is more powerful than I thought and
wish to believe.” The publication of his early findings on high-
reactive children in Science magazine in 1988 helped to legitimize
the idea of inborn temperament, partly because his “nurturist”
reputation was so strong.
If anyone could help me untangle the nature-nurture question, I
hoped, it was Jerry Kagan.
Kagan ushers me inside his office in Harvard’s William James Hall,
surveying me unblinkingly as I sit down: not unkind, but definitely
discerning. I had imagined him as a gentle, white-lab-coated
scientist in a cartoon, pouring chemicals from one test tube to
another until—poof! Now, Susan, you know exactly who you are. But
this isn’t the mild-mannered old professor I’d imagined. Ironically
for a scientist whose books are infused with humanism and who
describes himself as having been an anxious, easily frightened boy, I
find him downright intimidating. I kick off our interview by asking
a background question whose premise he disagrees with. “No, no,
no!” he thunders, as if I weren’t sitting just across from him.
The high-reactive side of my personality kicks into full gear. I’m
always soft-spoken, but now I have to force my voice to come out
louder than a whisper (on the tape recording of our conversation,
Kagan’s voice sounds booming and declamatory, mine much
quieter). I’m aware that I’m holding my torso tensely, one of the
telltale signs of the high-reactive. It feels strange to know that
Kagan must be observing this too—he says as much, nodding at me
as he notes that many high-reactives become writers or pick other
intellectual vocations where “you’re in charge: you close the door,
pull down the shades and do your work. You’re protected from
encountering unexpected things.” (Those from less educated
backgrounds tend to become file clerks and truck drivers, he says,
for the same reasons.)
I mention a little girl I know who is “slow to warm up.” She
studies new people rather than greeting them; her family goes to
the beach every weekend, but it takes her ages to dip a toe into the
surf. A classic high-reactive, I remark.
“No!” Kagan exclaims. “Every behavior has more than one cause.
Don’t ever forget that! For every child who’s slow to warm up, yes,
there will be statistically more high-reactives, but you can be slow
to warm up because of how you spent the first three and a half
years of your life! When writers and journalists talk, they want to
see a one-to-one relationship—one behavior, one cause. But it’s
really important that you see, for behaviors like slow-to-warm-up,
shyness, impulsivity, there are many routes to that.”
He reels off examples of environmental factors that could produce
an introverted personality independently of, or in concert with, a
reactive nervous system: A child might enjoy having new ideas
about the world, say, so she spends a lot of time inside her head. Or
health problems might direct a child inward, to what’s going on
inside his body.
My fear of public speaking might be equally complex. Do I dread
it because I’m a high-reactive introvert? Maybe not. Some high-
reactives love public speaking and performing, and plenty of
extroverts have stage fright; public speaking is the number-one fear
in America, far more common than the fear of death. Public
speaking phobia has many causes, including early childhood
setbacks, that have to do with our unique personal histories, not
inborn temperament.
In fact, public speaking anxiety may be primal and
quintessentially human, not limited to those of us born with a high-
reactive nervous system. One theory, based on the writings of the
sociobiologist E. O. Wilson, holds that when our ancestors lived on
the savannah, being watched intently meant only one thing: a wild
animal was stalking us. And when we think we’re about to be eaten,
do we stand tall and hold forth confidently? No. We run. In other
words, hundreds of thousands of years of evolution urge us to get
the hell off the stage, where we can mistake the gaze of the
spectators for the glint in a predator’s eye. Yet the audience expects
not only that we’ll stay put, but that we’ll act relaxed and assured.
This conflict between biology and protocol is one reason that
speechmaking can be so fraught. It’s also why exhortations to
imagine the audience in the nude don’t help nervous speakers;
naked lions are just as dangerous as elegantly dressed ones.
But even though all human beings may be prone to mistaking
audience members for predators, each of us has a different threshold
for triggering the fight-or-fiight response. How threateningly must
the eyes of the audience members narrow before you feel they’re
about to pounce? Does it happen before you’ve even stepped
onstage, or does it take a few really good hecklers to trigger that
adrenaline rush? You can see how a highly sensitive amygdala
would make you more susceptible to frowns and bored sighs and
people who check their BlackBerrys while you’re in mid-sentence.
And indeed, studies do show that introverts are significantly more
likely than extroverts to fear public speaking.
Kagan tells me about the time he watched a fellow scientist give a
wonderful talk at a conference. Afterward, the speaker asked if they
could have lunch. Kagan agreed, and the scientist proceeded to tell
him that he gives lectures every month and, despite his capable
stage persona, is terrified each time. Reading Kagan’s work had had
a big impact on him, however.
“You changed my life,” he told Kagan. “All this time I’ve been
blaming my mother, but now I think I’m a high-reactive.”
So am I introverted because I inherited my parents’ high reactivity,
copied their behaviors, or both? Remember that the heritability
statistics derived from twin studies show that introversion-
extroversion is only 40 to 50 percent heritable. This means that, in a
group of people, on average half of the variability in introversion-
extroversion is caused by genetic factors. To make things even more
complex, there are probably many genes at work, and Kagan’s
framework of high reactivity is likely one of many physiological
routes to introversion. Also, averages are tricky. A heritability rate
of 50 percent doesn’t necessarily mean that my introversion is 50
percent inherited from my parents, or that half of the difference in
extroversion between my best friend and me is genetic. One
hundred percent of my introversion might come from genes, or
none at all—or more likely some unfathomable combination of
genes and experience. To ask whether it’s nature or nurture, says
Kagan, is like asking whether a blizzard is caused by temperature or
humidity. It’s the intricate interaction between the two that makes
us who we are.
So perhaps I’ve been asking the wrong question. Maybe the
mystery of what percent of personality is nature and what percent
nurture is less important than the question of how your inborn
temperament interacts with the environment and with your own
free will. To what degree is temperament destiny?
On the one hand, according to the theory of gene-environment
interaction, people who inherit certain traits tend to seek out life
experiences that reinforce those characteristics. The most low-
reactive kids, for example, court danger from the time they’re
toddlers, so that by the time they grow up they don’t bat an eye at
grown-up-sized risks. They “climb a few fences, become
desensitized, and climb up on the roof,” the late psychologist David
Lykken once explained in an Atlantic article. “They’ll have all sorts
of experiences that other kids won’t. Chuck Yeager (the first pilot to
break the sound barrier) could step down from the belly of the
bomber into the rocketship and push the button not because he was
born with that difference between him and me, but because for the
previous thirty years his temperament impelled him to work his
way up from climbing trees through increasing degrees of danger
and excitement.”
Conversely, high-reactive children may be more likely to develop
into artists and writers and scientists and thinkers because their
aversion to novelty causes them to spend time inside the familiar—
and intellectually fertile—environment of their own heads. “The
university is filled with introverts,” observes the psychologist Jerry
Miller, director of the Center for the Child and the Family at the
University of Michigan. “The stereotype of the university professor
is accurate for so many people on campus. They like to read; for
them there’s nothing more exciting than ideas. And some of this has
to do with how they spent their time when they were growing up.
If you spend a lot of time charging around, then you have less time
for reading and learning. There’s only so much time in your life.”
On the other hand, there is also a wide range of possible
outcomes for each temperament. Low-reactive, extroverted
children, if raised by attentive families in safe environments, can
grow up to be energetic achievers with big personalities—the
Richard Bransons and Oprahs of this world. But give those same
children negligent caregivers or a bad neighborhood, say some
psychologists, and they can turn into bullies, juvenile delinquents,
or criminals. Lykken has controversially called psychopaths and
heroes “twigs on the same genetic branch.”
Consider the mechanism by which kids acquire their sense of
right and wrong. Many psychologists believe that children develop
a conscience when they do something inappropriate and are
rebuked by their caregivers. Disapproval makes them feel anxious,
and since anxiety is unpleasant, they learn to steer clear of
antisocial behavior. This is known as internalizing their parents’
standards of conduct, and its core is anxiety.
But what if some kids are less prone to anxiety than others, as is
true of extremely low-reactive kids? Often the best way to teach
these children values is to give them positive role models and to
channel their fearlessness into productive activities. A low-reactive
child on an ice-hockey team enjoys his peers’ esteem when he
charges at his opponents with a lowered shoulder, which is a “legal”
move. But if he goes too far, raises his elbow, and gives another
guy a concussion, he lands in the penalty box. Over time he learns
to use his appetite for risk and assertiveness wisely.
Now imagine this same child growing up in a dangerous
neighborhood with few organized sports or other constructive
channels for his boldness. You can see how he might fall into
delinquency. It may be that some disadvantaged kids who get into
trouble suffer not solely from poverty or neglect, say those who
hold this view, but also from the tragedy of a bold and exuberant
temperament deprived of healthy outlets.
The destinies of the most high-reactive kids are also influenced by
the world around them—perhaps even more so than for the average
child, according to a groundbreaking new theory dubbed “the
orchid hypothesis” by David Dobbs in a wonderful article in The
Atlantic. This theory holds that many children are like dandelions,
able to thrive in just about any environment. But others, including
the high-reactive types that Kagan studied, are more like orchids:
they wilt easily, but under the right conditions can grow strong and
magnificent.
According to Jay Belsky, a leading proponent of this view and a
psychology professor and child care expert at the University of
London, the reactivity of these kids’ nervous systems makes them
quickly overwhelmed by childhood adversity, but also able to
benefit from a nurturing environment more than other children do.
In other words, orchid children are more strongly affected by all
experience, both positive and negative.
Scientists have known for a while that high-reactive
temperaments come with risk factors. These kids are especially
vulnerable to challenges like marital tension, a parent’s death, or
abuse. They’re more likely than their peers to react to these events
with depression, anxiety, and shyness. Indeed, about a quarter of
Kagan’s high-reactive kids suffer from some degree of the condition
known as “social anxiety disorder,” a chronic and disabling form of
shyness.
What scientists haven’t realized until recently is that these risk
factors have an upside. In other words, the sensitivities and the
strengths are a package deal. High-reactive kids who enjoy good
parenting, child care, and a stable home environment tend to have
fewer emotional problems and more social skills than their lower-
reactive peers, studies show. Often they’re exceedingly empathic,
caring, and cooperative. They work well with others. They are kind,
conscientious, and easily disturbed by cruelty, injustice, and
irresponsibility. They’re successful at the things that matter to them.
They don’t necessarily turn into class presidents or stars of the
school play, Belsky told me, though this can happen, too: “For some
it’s becoming the leader of their class. For others it takes the form
of doing well academically or being well-liked.”
The upsides of the high-reactive temperament have been
documented in exciting research that scientists are only now
beginning to pull together. One of the most interesting findings,
also reported in Dobbs’s Atlantic article, comes from the world of
rhesus monkeys, a species that shares about 95 percent of its DNA
with humans and has elaborate social structures that resemble our
own.
In these monkeys as well as in humans, a gene known as the
serotonin-transporter (SERT) gene, or 5-HTTLPR, helps to regulate
the processing of serotonin, a neurotransmitter that affects mood. A
particular variation, or allele, of this gene, sometimes referred to as
the “short” allele, is thought to be associated with high reactivity
and introversion, as well as a heightened risk of depression in
humans who have had difficult lives. When baby monkeys with a
similar allele were subjected to stress—in one experiment they were
taken from their mothers and raised as orphans—they processed
serotonin less efficiently (a risk factor for depression and anxiety)
than monkeys with the long allele who endured similar privations.
But young monkeys with the same risky genetic profile who were
raised by nurturing mothers did as well as or better than their long-
allele brethren—even those raised in similarly secure environments
—at key social tasks, like finding playmates, building alliances, and
handling conflicts. They often became leaders of their troops. They
also processed serotonin more efficiently.
Stephen Suomi, the scientist who conducted these studies, has
speculated that these high-reactive monkeys owed their success to
the enormous amounts of time they spent watching rather than
participating in the group, absorbing on a deep level the laws of
social dynamics. (This is a hypothesis that might ring true to parents
whose high-reactive children hover observantly on the edges of
their peer group, sometimes for weeks or months, before edging
successfully inside.)
Studies in humans have found that adolescent girls with the short
allele of the SERT gene are 20 percent more likely to be depressed
than long-allele girls when exposed to stressful family
environments, but 25 percent less likely to be depressed when raised
in stable homes. Similarly, short allele adults have been shown to
have more anxiety in the evening than others when they’ve had
stressful days, but less anxiety on calm days. High-reactive four-
year-olds give more pro-social responses than other children when
presented with moral dilemmas—but this difference remains at age
five only if their mothers used gentle, not harsh, discipline. High-
reactive children raised in supportive environments are even more
resistant than other kids to the common cold and other respiratory
illnesses, but get sick more easily if they’re raised in stressful
conditions. The short allele of the SERT gene is also associated with
higher performance on a wide range of cognitive tasks.
These findings are so dramatic that it’s remarkable no one arrived
at them until recently. Remarkable, but perhaps not surprising.
Psychologists are trained to heal, so their research naturally focuses
on problems and pathology. “It is almost as if, metaphorically
speaking, sailors are so busy—and wisely—looking under the water
line for extensions of icebergs that could sink their ship,” writes
Belsky, “that they fail to appreciate that by climbing on top of the
iceberg it might prove possible to chart a clear passage through the
ice-laden sea.”
The parents of high-reactive children are exceedingly lucky,
Belsky told me. “The time and effort they invest will actually make
a difference. Instead of seeing these kids as vulnerable to adversity,
parents should see them as malleable—for worse, but also for
better.” He describes eloquently a high-reactive child’s ideal parent:
someone who “can read your cues and respect your individuality; is
warm and firm in placing demands on you without being harsh or
hostile; promotes curiosity, academic achievement, delayed
gratification, and self-control; and is not harsh, neglectful, or
inconsistent.” This advice is terrific for all parents, of course, but it’s
crucial for raising a high-reactive child. (If you think your child
might be high-reactive, you’re probably already asking yourself
what else you can do to cultivate your son or daughter. Chapter 11
has some answers.)
But even orchid children can withstand some adversity, Belsky
says. Take divorce. In general, it will disrupt orchid kids more than
others: “If the parents squabble a lot, and put their kid in the
middle, then watch out—this is the kid who will succumb.” But if
the divorcing parents get along, if they provide their child with the
other psychological nutrients he needs, then even an orchid child
can do just fine.
Most people would appreciate the flexibility of this message, I
think; few of us had problem-free childhoods.
But there’s another kind of flexibility that we all hope applies to
the question of who we are and what we become. We want the
freedom to map our own destinies. We want to preserve the
advantageous aspects of our temperaments and improve, or even
discard, the ones we dislike—such as a horror of public speaking. In
addition to our inborn temperaments, beyond the luck of the draw
of our childhood experience, we want to believe that we—as adults
—can shape our selves and make what we will of our lives.
Can we?