Part
One
THE EXTROVERT IDEAL
THE RISE OF THE “MIGHTY LIKEABLE FELLOW”
How Extroversion Became the Cultural Ideal
Strangers’ eyes, keen and critical.
Can you meet them proudly—confidently—without fear?
—PRINT ADVERTISEMENT FOR WOODBURY’S SOAP, 1922
The date: 1902. The place: Harmony Church, Missouri, a tiny, dot-
on-the-map town located on a fioodplain a hundred miles from
Kansas City. Our young protagonist: a good-natured but insecure
high school student named Dale.
Skinny, unathletic, and fretful, Dale is the son of a morally
upright but perpetually bankrupt pig farmer. He respects his parents
but dreads following in their poverty-stricken footsteps. Dale
worries about other things, too: thunder and lightning, going to
hell, and being tongue-tied at crucial moments. He even fears his
wedding day: What if he can’t think of anything to say to his future
bride?
One day a Chautauqua speaker comes to town. The Chautauqua
movement, born in 1873 and based in upstate New York, sends
gifted speakers across the country to lecture on literature, science,
and religion. Rural Americans prize these presenters for the whiff of
glamour they bring from the outside world—and their power to
mesmerize an audience. This particular speaker captivates the
young Dale with his own rags-to-riches tale: once he’d been a lowly
farm boy with a bleak future, but he developed a charismatic
speaking style and took the stage at Chautauqua. Dale hangs on his
every word.
A few years later, Dale is again impressed by the value of public
speaking. His family moves to a farm three miles outside of
Warrensburg, Missouri, so he can attend college there without
paying room and board. Dale observes that the students who win
campus speaking contests are seen as leaders, and he resolves to be
one of them. He signs up for every contest and rushes home at night
to practice. Again and again he loses; Dale is dogged, but not much
of an orator. Eventually, though, his efforts begin to pay off. He
transforms himself into a speaking champion and campus hero.
Other students turn to him for speech lessons; he trains them and
they start winning, too.
By the time Dale leaves college in 1908, his parents are still poor,
but corporate America is booming. Henry Ford is selling Model Ts
like griddle cakes, using the slogan “for business and for pleasure.”
J.C. Penney, Woolworth, and Sears Roebuck have become
household names. Electricity lights up the homes of the middle
class; indoor plumbing spares them midnight trips to the outhouse.
The new economy calls for a new kind of man—a salesman, a
social operator, someone with a ready smile, a masterful handshake,
and the ability to get along with colleagues while simultaneously
outshining them. Dale joins the swelling ranks of salesmen, heading
out on the road with few possessions but his silver tongue.
Dale’s last name is Carnegie (Carnagey, actually; he changes the
spelling later, likely to evoke Andrew, the great industrialist). After
a few grueling years selling beef for Armour and Company, he sets
up shop as a public-speaking teacher. Carnegie holds his first class
at a YMCA night school on 125th Street in New York City. He asks
for the usual two-dollars-per-session salary for night school
teachers. The Y’s director, doubting that a public-speaking class will
generate much interest, refuses to pay that kind of money.
But the class is an overnight sensation, and Carnegie goes on to
found the Dale Carnegie Institute, dedicated to helping businessmen
root out the very insecurities that had held him back as a young
man. In 1913 he publishes his first book, Public Speaking and
Influencing Men in Business. “In the days when pianos and bathrooms
were luxuries,” Carnegie writes, “men regarded ability in speaking
as a peculiar gift, needed only by the lawyer, clergyman, or
statesman. Today we have come to realize that it is the
indispensable weapon of those who would forge ahead in the keen
competition of business.”
Carnegie’s metamorphosis from farmboy to salesman to public-
speaking icon is also the story of the rise of the Extrovert Ideal.
Carnegie’s journey reflected a cultural evolution that reached a
tipping point around the turn of the twentieth century, changing
forever who we are and whom we admire, how we act at job
interviews and what we look for in an employee, how we court our
mates and raise our children. America had shifted from what the
influential cultural historian Warren Susman called a Culture of
Character to a Culture of Personality—and opened up a Pandora’s
Box of personal anxieties from which we would never quite recover.
In the Culture of Character, the ideal self was serious, disciplined,
and honorable. What counted was not so much the impression one
made in public as how one behaved in private. The word personality
didn’t exist in English until the eighteenth century, and the idea of
“having a good personality” was not widespread until the twentieth.
But when they embraced the Culture of Personality, Americans
started to focus on how others perceived them. They became
captivated by people who were bold and entertaining. “The social
role demanded of all in the new Culture of Personality was that of a
performer,” Susman famously wrote. “Every American was to
become a performing self.”
The rise of industrial America was a major force behind this
cultural evolution. The nation quickly developed from an
agricultural society of little houses on the prairie to an urbanized,
“the business of America is business” powerhouse. In the country’s
early days, most Americans lived like Dale Carnegie’s family, on
farms or in small towns, interacting with people they’d known since
childhood. But when the twentieth century arrived, a perfect storm
of big business, urbanization, and mass immigration blew the
population into the cities. In 1790, only 3 percent of Americans
lived in cities; in 1840, only 8 percent did; by 1920, more than a
third of the country were urbanites. “We cannot all live in cities,”
wrote the news editor Horace Greeley in 1867, “yet nearly all seem
determined to do so.”
Americans found themselves working no longer with neighbors
but with strangers. “Citizens” morphed into “employees,” facing the
question of how to make a good impression on people to whom
they had no civic or family ties. “The reasons why one man gained a
promotion or one woman suffered a social snub,” writes the
historian Roland Marchand, “had become less explicable on grounds
of long-standing favoritism or old family feuds. In the increasingly
anonymous business and social relationships of the age, one might
suspect that anything—including a first impression—had made the
crucial difference.” Americans responded to these pressures by
trying to become salesmen who could sell not only their company’s
latest gizmo but also themselves.
One of the most powerful lenses through which to view the
transformation from Character to Personality is the self-help
tradition in which Dale Carnegie played such a prominent role. Self-
help books have always loomed large in the American psyche. Many
of the earliest conduct guides were religious parables, like The
Pilgrim’s Progress, published in 1678, which warned readers to
behave with restraint if they wanted to make it into heaven. The
advice manuals of the nineteenth century were less religious but
still preached the value of a noble character. They featured case
studies of historical heroes like Abraham Lincoln, revered not only
as a gifted communicator but also as a modest man who did not, as
Ralph Waldo Emerson put it, “offend by superiority.” They also
celebrated regular people who lived highly moral lives. A popular
1899 manual called Character: The Grandest Thing in the World
featured a timid shop girl who gave away her meager earnings to a
freezing beggar, then rushed off before anyone could see what she’d
done. Her virtue, the reader understood, derived not only from her
generosity but also from her wish to remain anonymous.
But by 1920, popular self-help guides had changed their focus
from inner virtue to outer charm—“to know what to say and how to
say it,” as one manual put it. “To create a personality is power,”
advised another. “Try in every way to have a ready command of the
manners which make people think ‘he’s a mighty likeable fellow,’ ”
said a third. “That is the beginning of a reputation for personality.”
Success magazine and The Saturday Evening Post introduced
departments instructing readers on the art of conversation. The
same author, Orison Swett Marden, who wrote Character: The
Grandest Thing in the World in 1899, produced another popular title
in 1921. It was called Masterful Personality.
Many of these guides were written for businessmen, but women
were also urged to work on a mysterious quality called
“fascination.” Coming of age in the 1920s was such a competitive
business compared to what their grandmothers had experienced,
warned one beauty guide, that they had to be visibly charismatic:
“People who pass us on the street can’t know that we’re clever and
charming unless we look it.”
Such advice—ostensibly meant to improve people’s lives—must
have made even reasonably confident people uneasy. Susman
counted the words that appeared most frequently in the personality-
driven advice manuals of the early twentieth century and compared
them to the character guides of the nineteenth century. The earlier
guides emphasized attributes that anyone could work on improving,
described by words like
Citizenship
Duty
Work
Golden deeds
Honor
Reputation
Morals
Manners
Integrity
But the new guides celebrated qualities that were—no matter
how easy Dale Carnegie made it sound—trickier to acquire. Either
you embodied these qualities or you didn’t:
Magnetic
Fascinating
Stunning
Attractive
Glowing
Dominant
Forceful
Energetic
It was no coincidence that in the 1920s and the 1930s, Americans
became obsessed with movie stars. Who better than a matinee idol
to model personal magnetism?
Americans also received advice on self-presentation—whether they
liked it or not—from the advertising industry. While early print ads
were straightforward product announcements (“
EATON’S HIGHLAND LINEN:
”), the new personality-driven ads
THE FRESHEST AND CLEANEST WRITING PAPER
cast consumers as performers with stage fright from which only the
advertiser’s product might rescue them. These ads focused
obsessively on the hostile glare of the public spotlight. “
ALL AROUND YOU
,” warned a 1922 ad for Woodbury’s soap.
PEOPLE ARE JUDGING YOU SILENTLY
“ ,” advised the Williams Shaving
CRITICAL EYES ARE SIZING YOU UP RIGHT NOW
Cream company.
Madison Avenue spoke directly to the anxieties of male salesmen
and middle managers. In one ad for Dr. West’s toothbrushes, a
prosperous-looking fellow sat behind a desk, his arm cocked
confidently behind his hip, asking whether you’ve “
EVER TRIED SELLING
YOURSELF TO YOU? A FAVORABLE FIRST IMPRESSION IS THE GREATEST SINGLE FACTOR IN BUSINESS OR
.” The Williams Shaving Cream ad featured a slick-haired,
SOCIAL SUCCESS
mustachioed man urging readers to “
LET YOUR FACE REFLECT CONFIDENCE, NOT
.”
WORRY! IT’S THE ‘LOOK’ OF YOU BY WHICH YOU ARE JUDGED MOST OFTEN
Other ads reminded women that their success in the dating game
depended not only on looks but also on personality. In 1921 a
Woodbury’s soap ad showed a crestfallen young woman, home
alone after a disappointing evening out. She had “longed to be
successful, gay, triumphant,” the text sympathized. But without the
help of the right soap, the woman was a social failure.
Ten years later, Lux laundry detergent ran a print ad featuring a
plaintive letter written to Dorothy Dix, the Dear Abby of her day.
“Dear Miss Dix,” read the letter, “How can I make myself more
popular? I am fairly pretty and not a dumbbell, but I am so timid
and self-conscious with people. I’m always sure they’re not going to
like me.… —Joan G.”
Miss Dix’s answer came back clear and firm. If only Joan would
use Lux detergent on her lingerie, curtains, and sofa cushions, she
would soon gain a “deep, sure, inner conviction of being charming.”
This portrayal of courtship as a high-stakes performance reflected
the bold new mores of the Culture of Personality. Under the
restrictive (in some cases repressive) social codes of the Culture of
Character, both genders displayed some reserve when it came to the
mating dance. Women who were too loud or made inappropriate
eye contact with strangers were considered brazen. Upper-class
women had more license to speak than did their lower-class
counterparts, and indeed were judged partly on their talent for
witty repartee, but even they were advised to display blushes and
downcast eyes. They were warned by conduct manuals that “the
coldest reserve” was “more admirable in a woman a man wishe[d]
to make his wife than the least approach to undue familiarity.” Men
could adopt a quiet demeanor that implied self-possession and a
power that didn’t need to flaunt itself. Though shyness per se was
unacceptable, reserve was a mark of good breeding.
But with the advent of the Culture of Personality, the value of
formality began to crumble, for women and men alike. Instead of
paying ceremonial calls on women and making serious declarations
of intention, men were now expected to launch verbally
sophisticated courtships in which they threw women “a line” of
elaborate fiirtatiousness. Men who were too quiet around women
risked being thought gay; as a popular 1926 sex guide observed,
“homosexuals are invariably timid, shy, retiring.” Women, too,
were expected to walk a fine line between propriety and boldness.
If they responded too shyly to romantic overtures, they were
sometimes called “frigid.”
The field of psychology also began to grapple with the pressure to
project confidence. In the 1920s an influential psychologist named
Gordon Allport created a diagnostic test of “Ascendance-Submission”
to measure social dominance. “Our current civilization,” observed
Allport, who was himself shy and reserved, “seems to place a
premium upon the aggressive person, the ‘go-getter.’ ” In 1921, Carl
Jung noted the newly precarious status of introversion. Jung
himself saw introverts as “educators and promoters of culture” who
showed the value of “the interior life which is so painfully wanting
in our civilization.” But he acknowledged that their “reserve and
apparently groundless embarrassment naturally arouse all the
current prejudices against this type.”
But nowhere was the need to appear self-assured more apparent
than in a new concept in psychology called the inferiority complex.
The IC, as it became known in the popular press, was developed in
the 1920s by a Viennese psychologist named Alfred Adler to
describe feelings of inadequacy and their consequences. “Do you
feel insecure?” inquired the cover of Adler’s best-selling book,
Understanding Human Nature. “Are you fainthearted? Are you
submissive?” Adler explained that all infants and small children feel
inferior, living as they do in a world of adults and older siblings. In
the normal process of growing up they learn to direct these feelings
into pursuing their goals. But if things go awry as they mature, they
might be saddled with the dreaded IC—a grave liability in an
increasingly competitive society.
The idea of wrapping their social anxieties in the neat package of
a psychological complex appealed to many Americans. The
Inferiority Complex became an all-purpose explanation for problems
in many areas of life, ranging from love to parenting to career. In
1924, Collier’s ran a story about a woman who was afraid to marry
the man she loved for fear that he had an IC and would never
amount to anything. Another popular magazine ran an article called
“Your Child and That Fashionable Complex,” explaining to moms
what could cause an IC in kids and how to prevent or cure one.
Everyone had an IC, it seemed; to some it was, paradoxically
enough, a mark of distinction. Lincoln, Napoleon, Teddy Roosevelt,
Edison, and Shakespeare—all had suffered from ICs, according to a
1939 Collier’s article. “So,” concluded the magazine, “if you have a
big, husky, in-growing inferiority complex you’re about as lucky as
you could hope to be, provided you have the backbone along with
it.”
Despite the hopeful tone of this piece, child guidance experts of
the 1920s set about helping children to develop winning
personalities. Until then, these professionals had worried mainly
about sexually precocious girls and delinquent boys, but now
psychologists, social workers, and doctors focused on the everyday
child with the “maladjusted personality”—particularly shy children.
Shyness could lead to dire outcomes, they warned, from alcoholism
to suicide, while an outgoing personality would bring social and
financial success. The experts advised parents to socialize their
children well and schools to change their emphasis from book-
learning to “assisting and guiding the developing personality.”
Educators took up this mantle enthusiastically. By 1950 the slogan
of the Mid-Century White House Conference on Children and Youth
was “A healthy personality for every child.”
Well-meaning parents of the midcentury agreed that quiet was
unacceptable and gregariousness ideal for both girls and boys. Some
discouraged their children from solitary and serious hobbies, like
classical music, that could make them unpopular. They sent their
kids to school at increasingly young ages, where the main
assignment was learning to socialize. Introverted children were
often singled out as problem cases (a situation familiar to anyone
with an introverted child today).
William Whyte’s The Organization Man, a 1956 best-seller,
describes how parents and teachers conspired to overhaul the
personalities of quiet children. “Johnny wasn’t doing so well at
school,” Whyte recalls a mother telling him. “The teacher explained
to me that he was doing fine on his lessons but that his social
adjustment was not as good as it might be. He would pick just one
or two friends to play with, and sometimes he was happy to remain
by himself.” Parents welcomed such interventions, said Whyte.
“Save for a few odd parents, most are grateful that the schools work
so hard to offset tendencies to introversion and other suburban
abnormalities.”
Parents caught up in this value system were not unkind, or even
obtuse; they were only preparing their kids for the “real world.”
When these children grew older and applied to college and later for
their first jobs, they faced the same standards of gregariousness.
University admissions officers looked not for the most exceptional
candidates, but for the most extroverted. Harvard’s provost Paul
Buck declared in the late 1940s that Harvard should reject the
“sensitive, neurotic” type and the “intellectually over-stimulated” in
favor of boys of the “healthy extrovert kind.” In 1950, Yale’s
president, Alfred Whitney Griswold, declared that the ideal Yalie
was not a “beetle-browed, highly specialized intellectual, but a well-
rounded man.” Another dean told Whyte that “in screening
applications from secondary schools he felt it was only common
sense to take into account not only what the college wanted, but
what, four years later, corporations’ recruiters would want. ‘They
like a pretty gregarious, active type,’ he said. ‘So we find that the
best man is the one who’s had an 80 or 85 average in school and
plenty of extracurricular activity. We see little use for the “brilliant”
introvert.’ ”
This college dean grasped very well that the model employee of
the midcentury—even one whose job rarely involved dealing with
the public, like a research scientist in a corporate lab—was not a
deep thinker but a hearty extrovert with a salesman’s personality.
“Customarily, whenever the word brilliant is used,” explains Whyte,
“it either precedes the word ‘but’ (e.g., ‘We are all for brilliance,
but …’) or is coupled with such words as erratic, eccentric,
introvert, screwball, etc.” “These fellows will be having contact
with other people in the organization,” said one 1950s executive
about the hapless scientists in his employ, “and it helps if they make
a good impression.”
The scientist’s job was not only to do the research but also to help
sell it, and that required a hail-fellow-well-met demeanor. At IBM, a
corporation that embodied the ideal of the company man, the sales
force gathered each morning to belt out the company anthem, “Ever
Onward,” and to harmonize on the “Selling IBM” song, set to the
tune of “Singin’ in the Rain.” “Selling IBM,” it began, “we’re selling
IBM. What a glorious feeling, the world is our friend.” The ditty
built to a stirring close: “We’re always in trim, we work with a vim.
We’re selling, just selling, IBM.”
Then they went off to pay their sales calls, proving that the
admissions people at Harvard and Yale were probably right: only a
certain type of fellow could possibly have been interested in kicking
off his mornings this way.
The rest of the organization men would have to manage as best
they could. And if the history of pharmaceutical consumption is any
indication, many buckled under such pressures. In 1955 a drug
company named Carter-Wallace released the anti-anxiety drug
Miltown, reframing anxiety as the natural product of a society that
was both dog-eat-dog and relentlessly social. Miltown was marketed
to men and immediately became the fastest-selling pharmaceutical
in American history, according to the social historian Andrea Tone.
By 1956 one of every twenty Americans had tried it; by 1960 a
third of all prescriptions from U.S. doctors were for Miltown or a
similar drug called Equanil. “
ANXIETY AND TENSION ARE THE COMMONPLACE OF THE
,” read the Equanil ad. The 1960s tranquilizer Serentil followed
AGE
with an ad campaign even more direct in its appeal to improve
social performance. “ ,” it
FOR THE ANXIETY THAT COMES FROM NOT FITTING IN
empathized.
Of course, the Extrovert Ideal is not a modern invention.
Extroversion is in our DNA—literally, according to some
psychologists. The trait has been found to be less prevalent in Asia
and Africa than in Europe and America, whose populations descend
largely from the migrants of the world. It makes sense, say these
researchers, that world travelers were more extroverted than those
who stayed home—and that they passed on their traits to their
children and their children’s children. “As personality traits are
genetically transmitted,” writes the psychologist Kenneth Olson,
“each succeeding wave of emigrants to a new continent would give
rise over time to a population of more engaged individuals than
reside in the emigrants’ continent of origin.”
We can also trace our admiration of extroverts to the Greeks, for
whom oratory was an exalted skill, and to the Romans, for whom
the worst possible punishment was banishment from the city, with
its teeming social life. Similarly, we revere our founding fathers
precisely because they were loudmouths on the subject of freedom:
Give me liberty or give me death! Even the Christianity of early
American religious revivals, dating back to the First Great
Awakening of the eighteenth century, depended on the
showmanship of ministers who were considered successful if they
caused crowds of normally reserved people to weep and shout and
generally lose their decorum. “Nothing gives me more pain and
distress than to see a minister standing almost motionless, coldly
plodding on as a mathematician would calculate the distance of the
Moon from the Earth,” complained a religious newspaper in 1837.
As this disdain suggests, early Americans revered action and were
suspicious of intellect, associating the life of the mind with the
languid, ineffectual European aristocracy they had left behind. The
1828 presidential campaign pitted a former Harvard professor, John
Quincy Adams, against Andrew Jackson, a forceful military hero. A
Jackson campaign slogan tellingly distinguished the two: “John
Quincy Adams who can write / And Andrew Jackson who can
fight.”
The victor of that campaign? The fighter beat the writer, as the
cultural historian Neal Gabler puts it. (John Quincy Adams,
incidentally, is considered by political psychologists to be one of the
few introverts in presidential history.)
But the rise of the Culture of Personality intensified such biases,
and applied them not only to political and religious leaders, but also
to regular people. And though soap manufacturers may have
profited from the new emphasis on charm and charisma, not
everyone was pleased with this development. “Respect for
individual human personality has with us reached its lowest point,”
observed one intellectual in 1921, “and it is delightfully ironical
that no nation is so constantly talking about personality as we are.
We actually have schools for ‘self-expression’ and ‘self-
development,’ although we seem usually to mean the expression
and development of the personality of a successful real estate
agent.”
Another critic bemoaned the slavish attention Americans were
starting to pay to entertainers: “It is remarkable how much
attention the stage and things pertaining to it are receiving
nowadays from the magazines,” he grumbled. Only twenty years
earlier—during the Culture of Character, that is—such topics would
have been considered indecorous; now they had become “such a
large part of the life of society that it has become a topic of
conversation among all classes.”
Even T. S. Eliot’s famous 1915 poem The Love Song of J. Alfred
Prufrock—in which he laments the need to “prepare a face to meet
the faces that you meet”—seems a cri de coeur about the new
demands of self-presentation. While poets of the previous century
had wandered lonely as a cloud through the countryside
(Wordsworth, in 1802) or repaired in solitude to Walden Pond
(Thoreau, in 1845), Eliot’s Prufrock mostly worries about being
looked at by “eyes that fix you in a formulated phrase” and pin you,
wriggling, to a wall.
Fast-forward nearly a hundred years, and Prufrock’s protest is
enshrined in high school syllabi, where it’s dutifully memorized,
then quickly forgotten, by teens increasingly skilled at shaping their
own online and offline personae. These students inhabit a world in
which status, income, and self-esteem depend more than ever on the
ability to meet the demands of the Culture of Personality. The
pressure to entertain, to sell ourselves, and never to be visibly
anxious keeps ratcheting up. The number of Americans who
considered themselves shy increased from 40 percent in the 1970s
to 50 percent in the 1990s, probably because we measured
ourselves against ever higher standards of fearless self-presentation.
“Social anxiety disorder”—which essentially means pathological
shyness—is now thought to afflict nearly one in five of us. The most
recent version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-IV), the
psychiatrist’s bible of mental disorders, considers the fear of public
speaking to be a pathology—not an annoyance, not a disadvantage,
but a disease—if it interferes with the sufierer’s job performance.
“It’s not enough,” one senior manager at Eastman Kodak told the
author Daniel Goleman, “to be able to sit at your computer excited
about a fantastic regression analysis if you’re squeamish about
presenting those results to an executive group.” (Apparently it’s OK
to be squeamish about doing a regression analysis if you’re excited
about giving speeches.)
But perhaps the best way to take the measure of the twenty-first-
century Culture of Personality is to return to the self-help arena.
Today, a full century after Dale Carnegie launched that first public-
speaking workshop at the YMCA, his best-selling book How to Win
Friends and Influence People is a staple of airport bookshelves and
business best-seller lists. The Dale Carnegie Institute still offers
updated versions of Carnegie’s original classes, and the ability to
communicate fluidly remains a core feature of the curriculum.
Toastmasters, the nonprofit organization established in 1924 whose
members meet weekly to practice public speaking and whose
founder declared that “all talking is selling and all selling involves
talking,” is still thriving, with more than 12,500 chapters in 113
countries.
The promotional video on Toastmasters’ website features a skit in
which two colleagues, Eduardo and Sheila, sit in the audience at the
“Sixth Annual Global Business Conference” as a nervous speaker
stumbles through a pitiful presentation.
“I’m so glad I’m not him,” whispers Eduardo.
“You’re joking, right?” replies Sheila with a satisfied smile. “Don’t
you remember last month’s sales presentation to those new clients?
I thought you were going to faint.”
“I wasn’t that bad, was I?”
“Oh, you were that bad. Really bad. Worse, even.”
Eduardo looks suitably ashamed, while the rather insensitive
Sheila seems oblivious.
“But,” says Sheila, “you can fix it. You can do better.… Have you
ever heard of Toastmasters?”
Sheila, a young and attractive brunette, hauls Eduardo to a
Toastmasters meeting. There she volunteers to perform an exercise
called “Truth or Lie,” in which she’s supposed to tell the group of
fifteen-odd participants a story about her life, after which they
decide whether or not to believe her.
“I bet I can fool everyone,” she whispers to Eduardo sotto voce as
she marches to the podium. She spins an elaborate tale about her
years as an opera singer, concluding with her poignant decision to
give it all up to spend more time with her family. When she’s
finished, the toastmaster of the evening asks the group whether
they believe Sheila’s story. All hands in the room go up. The
toastmaster turns to Sheila and asks whether it was true.
“I can’t even carry a tune!” she beams triumphantly.
Sheila comes across as disingenuous, but also oddly sympathetic.
Like the anxious readers of the 1920s personality guides, she’s only
trying to get ahead at the office. “There’s so much competition in
my work environment,” she confides to the camera, “that it makes
it more important than ever to keep my skills sharp.”
But what do “sharp skills” look like? Should we become so
proficient at self-presentation that we can dissemble without anyone
suspecting? Must we learn to stage-manage our voices, gestures,
and body language until we can tell—sell—any story we want?
These seem venal aspirations, a marker of how far we’ve come—
and not in a good way—since the days of Dale Carnegie’s childhood.
Dale’s parents had high moral standards; they wanted their son to
pursue a career in religion or education, not sales. It seems unlikely
that they would have approved of a self-improvement technique
called “Truth or Lie.” Or, for that matter, of Carnegie’s best-selling
advice on how to get people to admire you and do your bidding.
How to Win Friends and Influence People is full of chapter titles like
“Making People Glad to Do What You Want” and “How to Make
People Like You Instantly.”
All of which raises the question, how did we go from Character to
Personality without realizing that we had sacrificed something
meaningful along the way?