CHAPTER 26
Getting Close to Power
As long as you're going to think anyway, think big.
—DONALD TRUMP
Newt Gingrich, the famous Republican politician and ail-
about-Washington gadfly, is known to tell a story about a
lion and a field mouse. A lion, he says, can use his prodigious
hunting skills to capture a field mouse with relative ease anytime
he wants, but at the end of the day, no matter how many mice he's
ensnared, he'll still be starving.
The moral of the story: Sometimes, despite the risk and work
involved, it's worth our time to go for the antelope.
Are you only connecting with field mice? If you are, start turn
ing your attention to reaching out to the sort of important people
that can make a difference in your life and the lives of others. The
kind of people who can make you, and your network, sparkle.
The conscious pursuit of people with power and celebrity has
a bad rap. We're taught to see it as an expression of vanity and
superficiality. We regard it as a cheap and easy means of getting
ahead. As a result, instead of acting on our impulses, we repress
them. We buy celebrity magazines like People, Us Weekly, or, in the
case of business folks, Fortune, to peer safely from a distance into
a world we're so obviously hungry to know more about.
I, on the other hand, think there's absolutely nothing wrong
with pursuing this world more directly. Seeking the influence of
powerful people in our lives is not crass or misguided; it can be
enormously helpful. Again, no one does it alone, whatever our
goal or mission. We need the help of lots of others.
Why is it that we're so taken with the lives of big achievers? If
we measure our accomplishments against the accomplishments of
others, it stands to reason that the more accomplished the people
we associate with, the greater our aspirations become.
People who fit our conventional notions of fame and celebrity
often have qualities or skills that we admire. Many of these people
have achieved great things through risk, passion, focus, hard
work, and positive attitudes. And so many of them have overcome
so much.
Of course, celebrity can mean all sorts of things to all sorts of
people. I define celebrity as public recognition by a large share
of a certain group. In other words, fame is a matter of context. In
college, public recognition is given to tenured professors or well-
known deans. In a small midwestern town, the celebrities may be
a politician, successful entrepreneur, or outspoken longtime resi
dent. These people have a disproportionate degree of influence
over the group they inhabit. That's why it has become popular to
use celebrities as spokespersons for major brands. They increase
awareness, create positive feelings around a company, and play an
important role in convincing consumers of a product's attractive
ness. Local mini-celebrities within your own group can do the
same for your brand.
That's what social scientists call "power by association": It's the
power that arises from being identified with influential people.
You can see this phenomenon at work everywhere. Power that
arises from internal associations, for example, can include per
sonal assistants and gatekeepers who may not be very high on the
ladder in terms of company hierarchy, but who are powerful sim-
ply because of their proximity and access to the chief executive
officer.
External associations, such as powerful politicians, influential
news reporters, mass media personalities, and so on, also help to
enhance one's profile inside and outside an organization. That's
why a smart start-up company, for example, will seek to populate
its board of directors with recognized business personalities who
can impart credibility to a new business. Certainly, having the ear
of influential celebrities or journalists can mean more favorable
coverage of you and your company or an unprecedented amount
of coverage for your charity.
Fame breeds fame. The fact is, all my prowess for reaching out
to other people would be far less effective if a few of those people
in my Rolodex weren't well-known names. The hard truth is that
the ones who get ahead are usually those who know how to make
highly placed people feel good about having them around. Plus,
they add a little magic. Real or imagined, these people have that X
factor that can magnify a moment and turn a prosaic dinner party
into something magnificent.
Problem is, while we're excited by the idea of meeting "celebri
ties," they are often not all that anxious to meet us. So how can we
get close to them?
There are no easy answers. But if you pursue these people in a
sincere manner, with good intentions, you're not being manipula
tive. And if you are emboldened by a mission and you've put in the
time and hard work to establish a web of people that count on
you, then the time will come when your growing influence will
put you in a place where you'll be face-to-face with someone who
can convey a lot of sparkle to your next dinner party. You'll get
close to power simply by virtue of reaching out and following the
the advice I have offered in this book.
When this does inevitably occur for you, there are a few things
to keep in mind that I've learned through the years.
While I'm aware of the impact a recognized persona can have
on one's network, and I'm certainly not shy about putting myself
in a place where meeting such people can occur, too much fuss and
adoration will kill your efforts before they begin. Folks are folks.
This came into play years ago when I was at the Vanity Fair
party at the old Russian Embassy following the White House Press
Corps dinner. When I was standing in line for cocktails, the man
beside me seemed awfully familiar. At first, I thought he was a
politician. Then I placed his face as someone who was involved in
politics, but behind the scenes in some manner, one of the Presi
dent's key advisors.
I was right—sort of. The man was Richard Schiff, the actor
who played the communications advisor to the fictional president
played by Martin Sheen in The West Wing. Out of context, I'm ter
rible with recognizing TV stars.
Just as casually as if he were someone I didn't know at all, I
introduced myself. He paused slightly, as celebrities are apt to do
before engaging with someone they don't know, and politely said
hello without introducing himself.
"And you are?" I asked. When he realized I didn't know who he
was immediately, he opened up. We ultimately exchanged e-mails
and stayed in touch.
I've found that trust is the essential element of mixing with
powerful and famous people—trust that you'll be discreet; trust
that you have no ulterior motives behind your approach; trust
that you'll deal with them as people and not as stars; and basically
trust that you feel like a peer who deserves to be engaged as such.
The first few moments of an encounter is the litmus test for such
a person to size up whether he or she can trust you in these ways
or not.
The irony of celebrities is that they often have very fragile egos.
In many cases, something in them drove them to want to be
famous. Imagine being publicly scrutinized by thousands of peo-
pie each day! However much the world opens up to celebrities, a
part of it also closes. There is a loss of privacy. And because they
live in a world of adulation, celebrities struggle every day balanc
ing their private and public personas. They often fret over the fact
that their public persona becomes indistinguishable from their
private personality. They feel misunderstood and underappreci
ated for who they really are.
To assure them that you're interested in them for themselves,
rather than what the public perceives them to be, stay away from
their fame and focus, instead, on their interests. You can certainly
let them know that you respect their work, but don't dwell. Take
them away from what they are normally barraged with.
Unfortunately, sometimes we make inappropriate exceptions
when talking to exceptional people. You simply have to watch and
listen with your heart as well as with your eyes. Find out what
their passions are.
Not long ago, I saw the then-Governor of Vermont, Howard
Dean, give a speech. It was at Renaissance Weekend and people
were joking about this unknown governor of this small state and
his crazy aspirations to become President. The next time I saw
him speak was at a nonprofit event for human rights in D.C. By
now, he was indeed running for President, although no one took
him seriously.
Intrigued by Dean and his message, I approached one of the
people in his campaign staff (which, at the time, was one campaign
aide and a state trooper). I told the aide that I was a politically
active fellow Yale alum who was interested in meeting the presi
dential hopeful at some point. The aide and I had a good talk and
I did talk briefly with Dean, as did many other folks at the event.
Two weeks later, there Dean was again at the Gill Foundation's
annual meeting in California, preparing to deliver the same talk I
had heard a couple weeks before. It would be the third time I saw
him speak on essentially the same subject, and I had some
thoughts on how he might deliver his speech more forcefully. I
caught the attention of his aide and asked if I could get a second
with the governor. We found him near the podium where he was
preparing minutes before he was to go on stage. I told him that I
had seen his talk on a number of occasions, I had spoken with his
aide, and I had some ideas for how he could deliver his speech
with more impact. I suggested that he emphasize a few points
here, play down a few points there, and cut down the length. Yes, I
was taking some risk, but what did I have to lose? And I was very
sincere in my suggestions. I cared about his message on human
rights and wanted him to get it across powerfully.
As I sat in the audience, I heard one recommendation after
another come to life in his speech. Holy cow! The Governor of
Vermont and by now full-fledged presidential candidate (although
still a really long shot) was taking my advice. After his talk, I told
him how impressive the talk was and that I wanted to devote the
rest of the event to introducing him to all the movers and shakers
(read: big donors) within the Gill Foundation.
Months later, when I saw the governor again at a fundraising
dinner party at the director Rob Reiner's home, he was no longer
an obscure candidate but a popular maverick setting the tone for
the entire Democratic nomination. Someone introduced the
two of us. "Governor, do you know Keith Ferrazzi?" Governor
Dean replied, "Of course I know Keith. He's one of the main peo
ple responsible for me getting the traction that made such a differ
ence in the early days." And I truly felt at that moment that I had
made a difference.
Just remember that famous and powerful people are first and
foremost people: They're proud, sad, insecure, hopeful, and if you
can help them achieve their goals, in whatever capacity, they will
be appreciative. Yes, it helps to be at the right places and invited to
the right events. But the fancy weekends and invite-only confer
ences aren't the only ways to meet important people.
In America, there is an association for everything. If you want
to meet the movers and shakers directly, you have to become a
joiner. It's amazing how accessible people are when we meet them
at events that speak to their interests.
Here are a few more places that I've found particularly reward
ing when looking to find people on the rise or who have already
risen:
Young Presidents' Organization (YPO)
This organization is for executive managers under the age of
forty-four and has regional chapters across the United States. If
you're running a business, or want to, there are plenty of entrepre
neurial organizations that will put you in front of the corporate
chieftains of tomorrow. Similar professional organizations exist for
the entire range of vocational pursuits. Graphic artists, lawyers,
computer programmers, and garbage collectors—like every other
occupation—have a union or group that serves as an advocate for
their interests. There is strength in numbers, and when you join
such a group, and become a central figure in that group's activities,
you'll become someone whom other powerful people will seek to
deal with.
Political Fundraisers
Although I once ran for office as a Republican, I no longer
openly discuss my political affiliation. Why? First, because I now
vote the person and the issues, not the party. Also so I have access
to those who are making a difference in both parties. I try and do
three to ten fundraisers at my home each year, supporting both
regional and national politicians who I believe will make a posi
tive difference from both sides of the aisle. Politics is the nexus of
money, passion, and power. In politics, the unknown person you
help today is the political heavy that can help you tomorrow. Join
a local campaign. Become an outspoken advocate on a particular
issue; if it lights your fire, it's sure to light the fire of others: Find
them and work together!
Conferences
When you have something unique to say and become a
speaker, you momentarily become a celebrity in your own right.
Networking is never easier than when people are coming to you.
There are thousands of conferences that indulge any number of
interests. If you develop a side expertise or passion, as I've sug
gested earlier, you can find out which well-known people share
your interest and attend the conferences that these people will
likely attend. Spirituality in leadership and human rights are two
passions of mine; I try to participate by being active in several
organizations and speaking at several conferences a year. I've met
countless prominent people this way.
Nonprofit Boards
Start out by finding four or five issues that are important to
you and then support them locally. Successful nonprofits seek out
a few famous people to sit on their boards to help them get pub
licity. Eventually, the goal is to become a board member yourself
and sit side by side with these people. But be sure you care and
indeed want to help the cause.
Sports (Especially Golf)
Sports and exercise are terrific areas where you can meet new,
important people. On the field or court, in the gym or on the
track, it's a level playing field. Reputation means little. What does
matter is the skill you have and the camaraderie you can create.
There's something about athletics that gets people to put down
their guard. Maybe competition of this sort taps into our psyche
in a certain way that brings us back to a more innocent time when
we were kids throwing a ball around on the street. Or maybe it's
the venue itself—away from the office, on a squash court or the
rolling green hills of a golf course.
Ah, golf. I would be doing you an injustice if I didn't tell you
squarely that golf, among all other sports, remains the true hub of
America's business elite. I've seen up close and personal how high-
profile CEOs and executives lobby desperately—often for years—
to be admitted into a private golf club. Why do these men and
women of power endure this humiliation to play a round or two?
It is, of course, the relationships, the building of friendships, the
camaraderie that is created with people who they know could be
very important to their company or career.
The rules of conduct are strict. It should never appear to any
one that you are trying to cash in on relationships or your mem
bership in the club. At some clubs, to so much as hint at a future
business deal on the course is a breach of etiquette; at others, you
can be rather blatant about it. You'll need to feel that out. But most
avid golfers will admit that the game has opened up countless
opportunities. They do, ultimately, get to do business with one
another—even if it's on the nineteenth hole, at the bar, over
drinks. Golfers also say that the experience on the course with
another person is very telling. It comes down, again, to trust. A
CEO can tell if a future business partner is discreet, if he or she
plays by the rules, if he or she can handle stress or is a pleasure to
be around. It is both a chance to meet new people and see if these
new people are up to snuff.
Because the game has proven so useful, there are many ways
one can enjoy its extracurricular benefits at any level. Almost all
industry associations host regular golf outings and tournaments.
Charities, conferences, and other organizations do the same in
hopes of drawing this distinguished group. You can participate in
any of these events without being a member.
As for me, despite my years caddying and the fact that I played
for my high school team and have won a few tournaments, I don't
play golf. It just takes too much time for me. Four-plus hours is
just too tough. Now I play only a periodic round with friends at a
wedding weekend or at a big event. But for me, it's mostly Barry's
Boot Camp for my kind of sports or squash at the Yale Club in
New York or a great run in Central Park or around the Hollywood
Hills. Whether it's golf, tennis, bowling, or boot camp, the idea is
to make it communal—join a league, a club, or an event, and
you're bound to meet some new, exciting people.
There's nothing wrong with looking for ways to spend time
with people who have accomplished more and have more wisdom
than you. Once you put yourself in position to connect with the
famous and powerful, the key is not to feel as if you're undeserv
ing or an impostor. You're a star in your own right, with your own
accomplishments, and you have a whole lot to give to the world.