Inputs and Outputs
All of the inputs and outputs in this section appear in alphabetical order; therefore, no sections
numbers are assigned.
Accepted deliverables. Products, results, or capabilities produced by a project and validated by the
project customer or sponsors as meeting their specified acceptance criteria.
The authorized stakeholder who signs off and approves the deliverables should get involved early
on in the process and provide feedback regarding the quality of the deliverables so that the team
can assess quality, performance, and recommend necessary changes.
Activity attributes. Activity attributes are multiple attributes associated with each schedule activity
that can be included within the activity list. Activity attributes include activity codes, predecessor
activities, successor activities, logical relationships, leads and lags, resource requirements, imposed
dates, constraints, and assumptions.
Activity attributes extend the description of the activity by identifying multiple components associated
with each activity. The components for each activity evolve over time. During the initial stages of
the project, they include the unique activity identifier (ID), WBS ID, and activity label or name. When
completed, they may include activity descriptions, predecessor activities, successor activities, logical
relationships, leads and lags, resource requirements, imposed dates, constraints, and assumptions.
Activity attributes can be used to identify the place where the work needs to be performed, the
project calendar the activity is assigned to, and the type of effort involved. Activity attributes are used
for schedule development and for selecting, ordering, and sorting the planned schedule activities in
various ways within reports.
Activity list. A documented tabulation of schedule activities that shows the activity description, activity
identifier, and a sufficiently detailed scope of work description so project team members understand
what work is to be performed.
Agreements. Any document or communication that defines the initial intentions of a project. This
can take the form of a contract, service-level agreement, memorandum of understanding (MOU),
letters of agreement, verbal agreement, purchase order, email, etc.
Agreements can be simple or complex. A complex project may involve multiple contracts
simultaneously or in sequence. Agreements must comply with local, national, and international
laws regarding contracts.
All components (of the project management plan). All components of the project management
plan are an input to this process. These components can be found in Table 1-6 of this practice guide.
Any component (of the project management plan). Any component of the project management
plan is an input to this process. These components can be found in Table 1-6 of this practice guide.
Approved change requests. Change requests processed according to the change management
plan by the project manager, change control board, or other designated person are either approved,
deferred, or rejected.
Approved change requests are implemented via the Direct and Manage Project Work process. Deferred
or rejected change requests are communicated to the person or group requesting the change.
The dispositions of all change requests are recorded in the change log as a project document update.
See also change requests.
Assumption log. A project document used to record all assumptions and constraints throughout
the project life cycle. New assumptions and constraints may be added, and the status of existing
assumptions and constraints may be updated or closed out.
High-level (strategic and operational) constraints are normally identified in the business case before
the project is initiated and then flow into the project charter. Lower-level activity and task assumptions
are generated throughout the project, such as defining technical specifications, estimates, schedule
activities, risks, etc. The assumption log is used to record all assumptions and constraints throughout
the project life cycle.
Basis of estimates. Supporting documentation outlining the details used in establishing project
estimates such as assumptions, constraints, level of detail, ranges, and confidence levels.
Regardless of the level of detail, the basis of estimates should provide a clear and complete under-
standing of how an estimate was derived. Documentation may include how the basis of estimate was
developed, assumptions made, known constraints, range of possible estimates (e.g., ±10%), confi-
dence level of the final estimate, and individual project risks influencing this estimate.
Benefits management plan. The documented explanation defining the processes for creating,
maximizing, and sustaining the benefits provided by a project or program.
The benefits management plan is the document that describes how and when the benefits of the
project will be delivered and the mechanisms that should be in place to measure those benefits.
A project benefit is an outcome of actions, behaviors, products, services, or results that provides
value to the sponsoring organization as well as to the project’s intended beneficiaries. Development
of the plan begins early in the project life cycle with the definition of the target benefits. The plan
describes key elements of the benefits and may include the following:
▶ Target benefits. The expected tangible and intangible value to be gained by the
implementation of the project; financial value is expressed as net present value (NPV).
▶ Strategic alignment. The alignment of the project to the business strategies of the
organization.
▶ Time frame for realizing benefits. The length of time to realize benefits, for example,
short-term, long-term, ongoing, or by phase.
▶ Benefits owner. The person accountable for monitoring, recording, and reporting
realized benefits throughout the time frame established in the plan.
▶ Metrics. The direct and indirect measures used to determine benefits realized.
▶ Assumptions. The factors expected to be in place or to be in evidence.
▶ Risks. Those risks pertaining to realization of benefit.
The data and information that are documented in the business case and needs assessment are used to
develop the benefits management plan. The benefits management plan and the project management
plan include a description of how the business value resulting from the project becomes part of the
organization’s ongoing operations, including the metrics to be used. The metrics provide verification
of the business value and validation of the project’s success.
Development and maintenance of the benefits management plan is an iterative activity. It complements
the business case, project charter, and project management plan. The project manager works with the
sponsor to ensure that the project charter, project management plan, and benefits management plan
remain in alignment throughout the life cycle of the project.
Both the business case and the benefits management plan are developed prior to the project
being initiated. Additionally, both documents are referenced after the project has been completed.
Therefore, they are considered business documents rather than project documents or components
of the project management plan. As appropriate, these business documents may be inputs to some
of the processes involved in managing the project, such as developing the project charter.
Bid documents. Bid documents are used to solicit proposals from prospective sellers. Terms such
as bid, tender, or quotation are generally used when the seller selection decision is based on price
(as when buying commercial or standard items), while a term such as proposal is generally used
when other considerations such as technical capability or technical approach are the most important.
Specific procurement terminology used may vary by industry and location of the procurement.
Depending on the goods or services needed, the bidding documents can include a request for
information, request for quotation, request for proposal, or other appropriate documents. The
conditions involving their use are presented below:
▶ Request for information (RFI). An RFI is used when more information on the goods
and services to be acquired is needed from the sellers. It will typically be followed by an
RFQ or RFP.
▶ Request for quotation (RFQ). An RFQ is commonly used when more information is needed
on how vendors would satisfy the requirements and/or how much it will cost.
▶ Request for proposal (RFP). An RFP is used when there is a problem in the project and the
solution is not easy to determine. This is the most formal of the “request for” documents
and has strict procurement rules for content, time line, and seller responses.
The buyer structures bid documents to facilitate both an accurate and complete response from
each prospective seller and an easy evaluation of the responses. These documents include a
description of the desired form of the response, the relevant procurement statement of work
(SOW), and any required contractual provisions.
The complexity and level of detail of the bid documents should be consistent with the value of,
and risks associated with, the planned procurement. Bid documents are required to be sufficiently
detailed to ensure consistent, appropriate responses, but flexible enough to allow consideration of
any seller suggestions for better ways to satisfy the same requirements.
Business case. A documented economic feasibility study used to establish the validity of the benefits
of a selected component lacking sufficient definition and that is used as a basis for the authorization
of further project management activities.
The business case lists the objectives and reasons for project initiation. It helps measure the project
success at the end of the project against the project objectives. The business case is a project
business document that is used throughout the project life cycle. The business case may be used
before project initiation and may result in a go/no-go decision for the project.
Both the business case and the benefits management plan are developed prior to the project
being initiated. Additionally, both documents are referenced after the project has been completed.
Therefore, they are considered business documents rather than project documents or components
of the project management plan. As appropriate, these business documents may be inputs to some
of the processes involved in managing the project, such as developing the project charter.
Business documents. The business case and benefits management plan contain information about
the project’s objectives and how the project will contribute to the business goals. Although both
documents are developed prior to the project, they are reviewed periodically.
In some organizations, the business case and benefits management plan are maintained at the
program level. The project sponsor is generally accountable for the development and maintenance
of the project business case document. The project manager is responsible for providing
recommendations and oversight to keep the project business case, project management plan,
project charter, and project benefits management plan success measures in alignment with one
another and with the goals and objectives of the organization.
Change log. A comprehensive list of changes submitted during the project, which includes the
current status. The disposition of all change requests is recorded in the change log as a project
document update.
Change management plan. A component of the project management plan that establishes the
change control board (CCB), documents the extent of its authority, and describes how the change
control system will be implemented.
The change management plan provides the direction for managing the change control process and
documents the roles and responsibilities of the CCB.
Change requests. A change request is a formal proposal to modify any document, deliverable,
or baseline. Change requests may be initiated internally or externally to the project.
When issues are found while project work is being performed, change requests are submitted to
modify project policies or procedures, project or product scope, project cost or budget, project
schedule, or the quality of the project or product results. Change requests may include corrective
action, preventive action, defect repair, or updates that reflect modified or additional ideas or content.
Other change requests cover the needed preventive or corrective actions to eliminate or minimize
a negative impact later in the project.
Any stakeholder may request a change. Change requests are processed for review and disposition
through the Perform Integrated Change Control process.
Closed procurements. The buyer, usually through its authorized procurement administrator,
provides the seller with formal written notice that the contract has been completed. Requirements
for formal procurement closure are usually defined in the terms and conditions of the contract and
are included in the procurement management plan. Typically, all deliverables should have been
provided on time and meet technical and quality requirements, there should be no outstanding
claims or invoices, and all final payments should have been made. The project management team
should have approved all deliverables prior to closure.
Communications management plan. The communications management plan is a component of
the project management plan and describes how project communications will be planned, structured,
implemented, and monitored for effectiveness. The plan contains the following information:
▶ Stakeholder communication requirements;
▶ Information to be communicated, including language, format, content, and level of detail;
▶ Escalation processes;
▶ Reason for the distribution of that information;
▶ Time frame and frequency for the distribution of required information and receipt
of acknowledgment or response, if applicable;
▶ Person responsible for communicating the information;
▶ Person responsible for authorizing release of confidential information;
▶ Person or groups who will receive the information, including information about their needs,
requirements, and expectations;
▶ Methods or technologies used to convey the information, such as memos, email, press
releases, or social media;
▶ Resources allocated for communication activities, including time and budget;
▶ Method for updating and refining the communications management plan as the project
progresses and develops, such as when the stakeholder community changes as the project
moves through different phases;
▶ Glossary of common terminology;
▶ Flowcharts of the information flow in the project, workflows with possible sequence
of authorization, list of reports, meeting plans, etc.; and
▶ Constraints derived from specific legislation or regulation, technology, organizational
policies, etc.
The communications management plan can include guidelines and templates for project status
meetings, project team meetings, virtual meetings, and email messages. The use of a project
website and project management software can be included if these are to be used in the project.
Configuration management plan. A component of the project management plan that describes
how to identify and account for project artifacts under configuration control, and how to record and
report changes to them.
The plan describes how information will be recorded and updated so that the product, service, or result
remains consistent and/or operative. As a general rule, each project’s configuration management plan
should define which project artifacts need to be placed under configuration control. Any change in a
configuration element should be formally controlled and will require a change request.
Cost baseline. The approved version of the time-phased project budget, excluding any management
reserves, which can be changed only through formal change control procedures and is used as a
basis for comparison to actual results.
Cost estimates. A cost estimate is a quantitative assessment of the likely costs for resources required
to complete the activity. It is a prediction that is based on the information known at a given point in
time. Cost estimates include the identification and consideration of costing alternatives to initiate and
complete the project. Cost trade-offs and risks should be considered, such as make versus buy, buy
versus lease, and the sharing of resources in order to achieve optimal costs for the project.
Cost estimates are generally expressed in units of some currency (i.e., dollars, euros, yen, etc.). In
some instances, other units of measure, such as staff hours or staff days, may be used to facilitate
comparisons by eliminating the effects of currency fluctuations.
Cost estimates should be reviewed and refined during the course of the project to reflect additional
details as they become available and assumptions are tested. The accuracy of a project estimate will
increase as the project progresses through the project life cycle.
Costs are estimated for all resources that will be charged to the project. This includes but is not
limited to labor, materials, equipment, services, and facilities, as well as special categories such as an
inflation allowance, cost of financing, or contingency costs. Cost estimates may be presented at the
activity level or in summary form.
Cost forecasts. Based on the project’s past performance, cost forecasts are used to determine if the
project is within defined tolerance ranges for budget and to identify any necessary change requests.
Either a calculated estimate at completion (EAC) value or a bottom-up EAC value is documented and
communicated to stakeholders.
Cost management plan. A component of a project or program management plan that describes
how costs will be planned, structured, and controlled. The cost management processes and their
associated tools and techniques are documented in the cost management plan.
For example, the cost management plan can establish the following:
▶ Units of measure. Each unit used in measurements (such as staff hours, staff days, or
weeks for time measures; meters, liters, tons, kilometers, or cubic yards for quantity
measures; or lump sum in currency form) is defined for each of the resources.
▶ Level of precision. This is the degree to which cost estimates will be rounded up or
down (e.g., US$995.59 to US$1,000), based on the scope of the activities and magnitude
of the project.
▶ Level of accuracy. The acceptable range (e.g., ±10%) used in determining realistic cost
estimates is specified and may include an amount for contingencies.
▶ Organizational procedures links. The work breakdown structure (WBS) (Section 5.5)
provides the framework for the cost management plan, allowing for consistency with
the estimates, budgets, and control of costs. The WBS component used for project cost
accounting is called the control account. Each control account is assigned a unique code or
account number(s) that links directly to the performing organization’s accounting system.
▶ Control thresholds. Variance thresholds for monitoring cost performance may be
specified to indicate an agreed-upon amount of variation to be allowed before some action
needs to be taken. Thresholds are typically expressed as percentage deviations from the
baseline plan.
▶ Rules of performance measurement. Earned value management (EVM) rules
of performance measurement are set. For example, the cost management plan may:
▹
Define the points in the WBS at which measurement of control accounts will be performed;
▹
Establish the EVM techniques (e.g., weighted milestones, fixed-formula, percent
complete, etc.) to be employed; and
▹
Specify tracking methodologies and the EVM computation equations for calculating
projected estimate at completion (EAC) forecasts to provide a validity check on the
bottom-up EAC.
▶ Reporting formats. The formats and frequency for the various cost reports are defined.
▶ Additional details. Additional details about cost management activities include but are
not limited to:
▹
Description of strategic funding choices,
▹
Procedure to account for fluctuations in currency exchange rates, and
▹
Procedure for project cost recording.
For more specific information regarding earned value management, refer to The Standard for Earned
Value Management [9].
Deliverables. Unique and verifiable products, results, or capabilities to perform a service that is
required to be produced to complete a process, phase, or project.
Projects are undertaken to fulfill objectives by producing deliverables. Deliverables may be tangible
or intangible.
Development approach. The development approach defines whether a predictive, adaptive, or
hybrid development approach will be used.
Duration estimates. Duration estimates are quantitative assessments of the likely number of time
periods that are required to complete an activity, phase, or project. Duration estimates do not include
any lags. Duration estimates may include some indication of the range of possible results. For example:
▶ A range of 2 weeks ± 2 days, which indicates that the activity will take at least 8 days and
not more than 12 (assuming a 5-day work week); or
▶ A 15% probability of exceeding 3 weeks, which indicates a high probability—85%—that the
activity will take 3 weeks or less.
Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs). Conditions, not under the immediate control of the
team, that influence, constrain, or direct the project, program, or portfolio. These conditions can
be internal and/or external to the organization. EEFs are considered as inputs to many project
management processes, specifically for most planning processes. These factors may enhance or
constrain project management options. In addition, these factors may have a positive or negative
influence on the outcome.
▶ EEFs internal to the organization:
▹
Organizational culture, structure, and governance. Examples include vision, mission,
values, beliefs, cultural norms, leadership style, hierarchy and authority relationships,
organizational style, ethics, code of conduct, policies, and procedures.
▹
Geographic distribution of facilities and resources. Examples include factory locations
and virtual teams.
▹
Infrastructure. Examples include existing facilities, equipment, organizational telecom-
munications channels, information technology hardware, availability, and capacity.
▹
Information technology software. Examples include scheduling software tools,
configuration management systems, web interfaces to other online automated
systems, and work authorization systems.
▹
Resource availability. Examples include contracting and purchasing constraints,
approved providers and subcontractors, and collaboration agreements.
▹
Employee capability. Examples include existing human resources expertise, skills,
competencies, and specialized knowledge.
▶ EEFs external to the organization:
▹
Marketplace conditions. Examples include competitors, market share brand recognition,
and trademarks.
▹
Social and cultural influences and issues. Examples include political climate, codes
of conduct, ethics, and perceptions.
▹
Legal restrictions. Examples include country or local laws and regulations related to
security, data protection, business conduct, employment, and procurement.
▹
Commercial databases. Examples include benchmarking results, standardized cost
estimating data, industry risk study information, and risk databases.
▹
Academic research. Examples include industry studies, publications, and
benchmarking results.
▹
Government or industry standards. Examples include regulatory agency regulations and
standards related to products, production, environment, quality, and workmanship.
▹
Financial considerations. Examples include currency exchange rates, interest rates,
inflation rates, tariffs, and geographic location.
▹
Physical environmental elements. Examples include working conditions, weather,
and constraints.
Final product, service, or result transition. A product, service, or result, once delivered by the
project, may be handed over to a different group or organization that will operate, maintain, and
support it throughout its life cycle.
This output refers to this transition of the final product, service, or result that the project was
authorized to produce (or in the case of phase closure, the intermediate product, service, or result
of that phase) from one team to another.
Final report. A summary of project performance, which can include information such as:
▶ Summary-level description of the project or phase.
▶ Scope objectives, the criteria used to evaluate the scope, and evidence that the completion
criteria were met.
▶ Quality objectives, the criteria used to evaluate the project and product quality, the verification
and actual milestone delivery dates, and reasons for variances.
▶ Cost objectives, including the acceptable cost range, actual costs, and reasons for any
variances.
▶ Summary of the validation information for the final product, service, or result.
▶ Schedule objectives, including whether results achieved the benefits that the project was
undertaken to address. If the benefits are not met at the close of the project, indicate the
degree to which they were achieved and estimate for future benefits realization.
▶ Summary of how the final product, service, or result achieved the business needs identified
in the business plan. If the business needs are not met at the close of the project, indicate
the degree to which they were achieved and estimate for when the business needs will be
met in the future.
▶ Summary of any risks or issues encountered on the project and how they were addressed.
Independent cost estimates. For large procurements, a procuring organization may elect to
either prepare its own independent estimate or have a cost estimate prepared by an outside
professional estimator to serve as a benchmark on proposed responses. Significant differences in
cost estimates can be an indication that the procurement statement of work (SOW) was deficient
or ambiguous, or that the prospective sellers either misunderstood or failed to respond fully to
the procurement SOW.
Issue log. A project document where information about issues is recorded and monitored.
Lessons learned register. A project document used to record knowledge gained during a project
so that it can be used in the current project and entered into the lessons learned repository.
The lessons learned register can include the category and description of the situation. It may also
include the impact, recommendations, and proposed actions associated with the situation. The
lessons learned register records challenges, problems, realized risks and opportunities, or other
content as appropriate.
The lessons learned register is created as an output of the Manage Project Knowledge process early in
the project. Thereafter it is used as an input and updated as an output in many processes throughout
the project. The persons or teams involved in the work are also involved in capturing the lessons
learned. Knowledge can be documented using videos, pictures, audios, or other suitable means that
ensure the efficiency of the lessons captured.
At the end of a project or phase, the information is transferred to an organizational process asset
called a lessons learned repository.
Make-or-buy decisions. Make-or-buy decisions are made regarding the external purchase or internal
manufacture of a product. A make-or-buy analysis results in a decision as to whether particular work
can best be accomplished by the project team or needs to be purchased from outside sources.
Milestone list. A milestone list identifies all project milestones and indicates whether the
milestone is mandatory, such as those required by contract, or optional, such as those based on
historical information. Milestones have zero duration because they represent a significant point or
event in a project.
Organizational process assets (OPAs). The plans, processes, documents, templates, and knowledge
repositories specific to and used by the performing organization. These assets influence the
management of the project.
OPAs include any artifact, practice, or knowledge from any or all of the performing organizations
involved in the project that can be used to execute or govern the project. The OPAs also include
the organization’s lessons learned from previous projects and historical information. OPAs may
include completed schedules, risk data, and earned value data. OPAs are inputs to many project
management processes. Since OPAs are internal to the organization, the project team members may
be able to update and add to the organizational process assets as necessary throughout the project.
They may be grouped into two categories:
▶ Processes, documents, and templates. Generally, assets in this category are not updated
as part of the project work. Processes, documents, and templates are usually established
by the project management office (PMO) or another function outside of the project. These
can be updated only by following the appropriate organizational policies associated with
updating these assets. Some organizations encourage the team to tailor templates, life
cycles, and checklists for the project. In these instances, the project management team
should tailor those assets to meet the needs of the project.
▶ Organizational knowledge repositories. Assets in this category are updated throughout
the project with project information. For example, information on financial performance,
lessons learned, performance metrics and issues, and defects are continually updated
throughout the project.
Organizational process assets updates. Any organizational process asset can be updated as a result
of a process. Updates include plans, processes, and knowledge repositories specific to and used by the
performing organization.
Outputs from other processes. Outputs from other processes are integrated to create the project
management plan. Subsidiary plans and baselines that are an output from other processes are inputs
to this process. In addition, changes to these documents may necessitate updates to the project
management plan.
Performance measurement baseline (PMB). An integrated scope, schedule, and cost plan for the
project work used for comparison to manage, measure, and control project performance.
Physical resource assignments. This documentation records the material, equipment, supplies,
locations, and other physical resources that will be used during the project. It describes the expected
resource utilization and whether the resource is internal to the organization or outsourced. Physical
resource assignments are dynamic and subject to change due to availability, the project, organization,
environment, or other factors.
Pre-assignment. When physical or team resources for a project are determined in advance, they
are considered pre-assigned. This situation can occur if the project is the result of specific resources
being identified as part of a competitive proposal or if the project is dependent upon the expertise
of particular persons. Pre-assignment might also include the team members who have already
been assigned in Develop Project Charter Process or other processes before the initial resource
management plan has been completed.
Probability and impact matrix. A probability and impact matrix is a grid for mapping the probability
of each risk occurrence and its impact on project objectives if that risk occurs. This matrix specifies
combinations of probability and impact that allow individual project risks to be divided into priority
groups (see Figure 9-1). Risks can be prioritized for further analysis and planning of risk responses
based on their probability and impacts. The probability of occurrence for each individual project risk
is assessed as well as its impact on one or more project objectives if it does occur, using definitions
of probability and impact for the project as specified in the risk management plan. Individual project
risks are assigned to a priority level based on the combination of their assessed probability and
impact, using a probability and impact matrix.
An organization can assess a risk separately for each objective (e.g., cost, time, and scope) by having
a separate probability and impact matrix for each. Alternatively, it may develop ways to determine
one overall priority level for each risk, either by combining assessments for different objectives, or by
taking the highest priority level regardless of which objective is affected.
Procurement documentation. All documents used in signing, executing, and closing an agreement.
Procurement documentation may include documents predating the project. Procurement docu-
mentation contains complete supporting records for administration of the procurement processes.
Procurement documentation includes the statement of work, payment information, contractor work
performance information, plans, drawings, and other correspondence.
Procurement documentation updates. Procurement documentation that may be updated
includes the contract with all supporting schedules, requested unapproved contract changes, and
approved change requests. Procurement documentation also includes any seller-developed technical
documentation and other work performance information such as deliverables, seller performance
reports and warranties, financial documents including invoices and payment records, and the results
of contract-related inspections.
Procurement management plan. A component of the project or program management plan
that describes how a project team will acquire goods and services from outside of the performing
organization.
ytilibaborP
Probability
Threats Opportunities
Very High Very High
0.90 0.05 0.09 0.18 0.36 0.72 0.72 0.36 0.18 0.09 0.05 0.90
High High
0.70 0.04 0.07 0.14 0.28 0.56 0.56 0.28 0.14 0.07 0.04 0.70
Medium Medium
0.50 0.03 0.05 0.10 0.20 0.40 0.40 0.20 0.10 0.05 0.03 0.50
Low Low
0.30 0.02 0.03 0.06 0.12 0.24 0.24 0.12 0.06 0.03 0.02 0.30
Very Low Very Low
0.10 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.04 0.08 0.08 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.10
Very Low Low Moderate High Very High Very High High Moderate Low Very Low
0.05 0.10 0.20 0.40 0.80 0.80 0.40 0.20 0.10 0.05
Negative Impact Positive Impact
Figure 9-1. Example Probability and Impact Matrix with Scoring Scheme
The procurement management plan contains the activities to be undertaken during the procurement
process. It should document whether international competitive bidding, national competitive bidding,
local bidding, etc., should be done. If the project is financed externally, the sources and availability of
funding should be aligned with the procurement management plan and the project schedule.
The procurement management plan can include guidance for:
▶ How procurement will be coordinated with other project aspects, such as project schedule
development and control processes;
▶ Timetable of key procurement activities;
▶ Procurement metrics to be used to manage contracts;
▶ Stakeholder roles and responsibilities related to procurement, including authority and
constraints of the project team when the performing organization has a procurement
department;
▶ Constraints and assumptions that could affect planned procurements;
▶ Legal jurisdiction and the currency in which payments will be made;
▶ Determination of whether independent estimates will be used and whether they are
needed as evaluation criteria;
▶ Risk management issues including identifying requirements for performance bonds
or insurance contracts to mitigate some forms of project risk; and
▶ Prequalified sellers, if any, to be used.
A procurement management plan can be formal or informal, can be highly detailed or broadly
framed, and is based upon the needs of each project.
Procurement statement of work. The statement of work (SOW) for each procurement is
developed from the project scope baseline and defines only that portion of the project scope that
is to be included within the related contract. The SOW describes the procurement item in sufficient
detail to allow prospective sellers to determine if they are capable of providing the products,
services, or results. Sufficient detail can vary based on the nature of the item, the needs of the
buyer, or the expected contract form. Information included in a SOW can include specifications,
quantity desired, quality levels, performance data, period of performance, work location, and
other requirements.
The procurement SOW should be clear, complete, and concise. It includes a description of any
collateral services required, such as performance reporting or post-project operational support
for the procured item. The SOW can be revised as required as it moves through the procurement
process until incorporated into a signed agreement.
The phrase terms of reference (TOR) is sometimes used when contracting for services. Similar to the
procurement SOW, a TOR typically includes these elements:
▶ Tasks the contractor is required to perform as well as specified coordination requirements;
▶ Standards the contractor will fulfill that are applicable to the project;
▶ Data that need to be submitted for approval;
▶ Detailed list of all data and services that will be provided to the contractor by the buyer for
use in performing the contract, if applicable; and
▶ Definition of the schedule for initial submission and the review/approval time required.
Procurement strategy. Once the make-or-buy analysis is complete and the decision is made to
acquire from outside the project, a procurement strategy should be identified. The objective of
the procurement strategy is to determine the project delivery method, the type of legally binding
agreement(s), and how the procurement will advance through the procurement phases.
▶ Delivery methods. Delivery methods are different for professional services versus
construction projects.
▹
For professional services, delivery methods include: buyer/services provider with no
subcontracting, buyer/services provider with subcontracting allowed, joint venture
between buyer and services provider, and buyer/services provider acts as the
representative.
▹
For industrial or commercial construction, project delivery methods include but are not
limited to: turnkey, design build (DB), design bid build (DBB), design build operate
(DBO), build own operate transfer (BOOT), and others.
▶ Contract payment types. Contract payment types are separate from the project delivery
methods and are coordinated with the buying organization’s internal financial systems.
They include but are not limited to these contract types plus variations: lump sum, firm
fixed price, cost plus fixed fee, cost plus award fees, cost plus incentive fees, time and
materials, target cost, and others.
▹
Fixed-price contracts are suitable when the type of work is predictable and the
requirements are well defined and not likely to change.
▹
Cost plus contracts are suitable when the work is evolving, likely to change,
or not well defined.
▹
Incentives and awards may be used to align the objectives of buyer and seller.
▶ Procurement phases. The procurement strategy can also include information on
procurement phases. Information may include:
▹
Sequencing or phasing of the procurement, a description of each phase and the
specific objectives of each phase;
▹
Procurement performance indicators and milestones to be used in monitoring;
▹
Criteria for moving from phase to phase;
▹
Monitoring and evaluation plan for tracking progress; and
▹
Process for knowledge transfer for use in subsequent phases.
Project calendars. A project calendar identifies working days and shifts that are available for
scheduled activities. It distinguishes time periods in days or parts of days that are available to
complete scheduled activities from time periods that are not available for work. A schedule model
may require more than one project calendar to allow for different work periods for some activities
to calculate the project schedule. Project calendars may be updated.
Project charter. A document issued by the project initiator or sponsor that formally authorizes the
existence of a project and provides the project manager with the authority to apply organizational
resources to project activities.
Project communications. Project communications artifacts may include but are not limited to:
performance reports, deliverable status, schedule progress, cost incurred, presentations, and other
information required by stakeholders.
Project documents. The documentation created throughout the five Process Groups to initiate,
plan, execute, manage and control, close, and deliver the project. There are 33 project documents
listed in Table 1-6 of this practice guide. Examples include change log, issue log, project schedule,
project scope statement, requirements documentation, risk register, and stakeholder register.
Project documents updates. The documentation that is updated throughout the five Process
Groups to initiate, plan, execute, manage and control, close, and deliver the project. There are
33 project documents listed in Table 1-6 of this practice guide. Examples include change log, issue
log, project schedule, project scope statement, requirements documentation, risk register, and
stakeholder register.
Project funding requirements. Total funding requirements and periodic funding requirements
(e.g., quarterly, annually) are derived from the cost baseline. The cost baseline includes projected
expenditures plus anticipated liabilities. Funding often occurs in incremental amounts, and may
not be evenly distributed, which appear as steps in Figure 9-2. The total funds required are those
included in the cost baseline plus management reserves, if any. Funding requirements may include
the source(s) of the funding. The budget at completion (BAC) is the sum of all budgets established for
the work to be performed.
Project Budget
Management Reserve
BAC
Funding Requirements
Expenditures
Cost Baseline
Time
Project life cycle description. The project life cycle determines the series of phases that a project
passes through from its inception to the end of the project.
Project management plan. The document that describes how the project will be executed, monitored
and controlled, and closed.
seulaV
evitalumuC
Figure 9-2. Cost Baseline, Expenditures, and Funding Requirements
Project management plan updates. Updates to the document that describes how the project is being
executed, monitored and controlled, and closed.
Project schedule. A schedule model output that presents linked activities with planned dates,
durations, milestones, and resources. The detailed project schedule should be flexible throughout
the project to adjust for the knowledge gained, increased understanding of the risks, and value-
added activities.
Project schedule network diagrams. A project schedule network diagram is a graphical
representation of the logical relationships, also referred to as dependencies, among the project
schedule activities. Figure 9-3 illustrates a project schedule network diagram. A project schedule
network diagram is produced manually or by using project management software. It can include
full project details or have one or more summary activities. A summary narrative can accompany
the diagram and describe the basic approach used to sequence the activities. Any unusual activity
sequences within the network should be fully described within the narrative.
Activities that have multiple predecessor activities indicate a path convergence. Activities that have
multiple successor activities indicate a path divergence. Activities with divergence and convergence
are at greater risk as they are affected by multiple activities or can affect multiple activities. Activity
I is called a path convergence, as it has more than one predecessor, while activity K is called a path
divergence, as it has more than one successor.
A B
SS
C D E
FS + 15
Begin H F G End
SS + 10
I J
FF
K L
Figure 9-3. Example of Project Schedule Network Diagram
Project scope statement. The project scope statement includes the description of the project
scope, major deliverables, and exclusions. The project scope statement documents the entire
scope, including project and product scope. It describes the project’s deliverables in detail. It also
provides a common understanding of the project scope among project stakeholders. It may contain
explicit scope exclusions that can assist in managing stakeholder expectations. It enables the
project team to perform more detailed planning, guides the project team’s work during execution,
and provides the baseline for evaluating whether requests for changes or additional work are
contained within or outside the project’s boundaries.
The degree and level of detail to which the project scope statement defines the work that will be
performed and the work that is excluded, can help determine how well the project management
team can control the overall project scope. The detailed project scope statement, either directly
or by reference to other documents, includes the following:
▶ Product scope description. Progressively elaborates the characteristics of the product,
service, or result described in the project charter and requirements documentation.
▶ Deliverables. Any unique and verifiable product, result, or capability to perform a service
that is required to be produced to complete a process, phase, or project. Deliverables also
include ancillary results, such as project management reports and documentation. These
deliverables may be described at a summary level or in great detail.
▶ Acceptance criteria. A set of conditions that is required to be met before deliverables
are accepted.
▶ Project exclusions. Identifies what is excluded from the project. Explicitly stating what
is out of scope for the project helps manage stakeholders’ expectations and can reduce
scope creep.
Although the project charter and the project scope statement are sometimes perceived as containing
a certain degree of redundancy, they are different in the level of detail contained in each. The project
charter contains high-level information, while the project scope statement contains a detailed
description of the scope components. These components are progressively elaborated throughout
the project. Table 9-1 describes some of the key elements for each document.
Table 9-1. Elements of the Project Charter and Project Scope Statement
Project Charter Project Scope Statement
Project purpose Project scope description (progressively
elaborated)
Measurable project objectives and related
success criteria Project deliverables
High-level requirements Acceptance criteria
High-level project description, boundaries, Project exclusions
and key deliverables
Overall project risk
Summary milestone schedule
Preapproved financial resources
Key stakeholder list
Project approval requirements (i.e., what
constitutes success, who decides the
project is successful, who signs off on the
project)
Project exit criteria (i.e., what are the
conditions to be met in order to close or
to cancel the project or phase)
Assigned project manager, responsibility,
and authority level
Name and authority of the sponsor or
other person(s) authorizing the project
charter
Project team assignments. A document containing a record of the team members and their roles and
responsibilities for the project. This documentation can include a project team directory and names
inserted into the project management plan, such as the project organization charts and schedules.
Quality control measurements. The documented results of the Control Quality process activities.
The measurements should be captured in the format specified in the quality management plan.
Quality management plan. The quality management plan is a component of the project
management plan and describes how applicable policies, procedures, and guidelines will be
implemented to achieve the quality objectives. It describes the activities and resources necessary
for the project management team to achieve the quality objectives set for the project. The quality
management plan may be formal or informal, detailed or broadly framed. The style and detail of the
quality management plan are determined by the requirements of the project. It should be reviewed
early in the project to ensure that decisions are based on accurate information. The benefits of this
review can include a sharper focus on the project’s value proposition, reductions in costs, and less
frequent schedule overruns that are caused by rework.
The quality management plan may include but is not limited to the following components:
▶ Quality standards that will be used by the project,
▶ Quality objectives of the project,
▶ Quality roles and responsibilities,
▶ Project deliverables and processes subject to quality review,
▶ Quality control and quality management activities planned for the project,
▶ Quality tools that will be used for the project, and
▶ Major procedures relevant for the project, such as dealing with nonconformance,
corrective actions procedures, and continuous improvement procedures.
Quality metrics. A quality metric specifically describes a project or product attribute and how
the Control Quality process will verify compliance to it. Some examples of quality metrics include
percentage of tasks completed on time, cost performance measured by a cost performance index
(CPI), failure rate, number of defects identified per day, total downtime per month, errors found per
line of code, customer satisfaction scores, and percentage of requirements covered by the test plan
as a measure of test coverage.
Quality report. A project document that includes quality management issues, recommendations
for corrective actions, and a summary of findings from quality control activities. It may include
recommendations for process, project, and product improvements.
Quality reports can be graphical, numerical, or qualitative. The information provided can
be used by other processes and departments to take corrective actions in order to achieve the
expected quality. Information presented in the quality reports may include all quality management
issues escalated by the team; recommendations for process, project, and product improvements;
corrective actions recommendations (including rework, defect/bugs repair, 100% inspection, and
more); and the summary of findings from the Control Quality process.
Requirements documentation. A description of how individual requirements meet the business
need for the project.
Requirements may start out at a high level and become progressively more detailed as more
information about the requirements becomes known. Before being baselined, requirements need
to be unambiguous (measurable and testable), traceable, complete, consistent, and acceptable to
key stakeholders. The format of the requirements document may range from a simple document
listing all of the requirements categorized by stakeholder and priority, to more elaborate forms
containing an executive summary, detailed descriptions, and attachments.
Many organizations categorize requirements into different types, such as business and technical
solutions. Business solutions refer to stakeholder needs and technical solutions determine how those
needs will be implemented. Requirements can be grouped into classifications allowing for further
refinement and detail as the requirements are elaborated. These classifications include:
▶ Business requirements. These describe the higher-level needs of the organization as
a whole, such as business issues or opportunities, and reasons why a project has been
undertaken.
▶ Stakeholder requirements. These describe the needs of a stakeholder or stakeholder group.
▶ Solution requirements. These describe features, functions, and characteristics of the
product, service, or result that will meet the business and stakeholder requirements.
Solution requirements are further grouped into functional and nonfunctional
requirements:
▹
Functional requirements. Functional requirements describe the behaviors of the product.
Examples include actions, processes, data, and interactions that the product should
execute.
▹
Nonfunctional requirements. Nonfunctional requirements supplement functional
requirements and describe the environmental conditions or qualities required for the
product to be effective. Examples include reliability, security, performance, safety, level
of service, supportability, retention/purge, etc.
▶ Transition and readiness requirements. These describe temporary capabilities, such
as data conversion and training requirements, needed to transition from the current as-is
state to the desired future state.
▶ Project requirements. These describe the actions, processes, or other conditions the project
needs to meet. Examples include milestone dates, contractual obligations, constraints, etc.
▶ Quality requirements. These capture any condition or criteria needed to validate the
successful completion of a project deliverable or fulfillment of other project requirements.
Examples include tests, certifications, validations, etc.
Requirements management plan. The requirements management plan is a component of the
project management plan and describes how project and product requirements will be analyzed,
documented, and managed. According to Business Analysis for Practitioners: A Practice Guide [3], some
organizations refer to it as a business analysis plan. Components of the requirements management
plan can include but are not limited to:
▶ How requirements activities will be planned, tracked, and reported;
▶ Configuration management activities, such as:
▹
How changes will be initiated;
▹
How impacts will be analyzed;
▹
How changes will be traced, tracked, and reported; and
▹
Authorization levels required to approve these changes.
▶ Requirements prioritization process;
▶ Metrics that will be used and the rationale for using them; and
▶ Traceability structure that reflects the requirement attributes captured on the
traceability matrix.
Requirements traceability matrix. The requirements traceability matrix is a grid that links
product requirements from their origin to the deliverables that satisfy them. The implementation
of a requirements traceability matrix helps to ensure that each requirement adds business value
by linking it to the business and project objectives. It provides a means to track requirements
throughout the project life cycle, helping to ensure that requirements approved in the requirements
documentation are delivered at the end of the project. Finally, it provides a structure for managing
changes to the product scope.
Tracing requirements includes but is not limited to:
▶ Business needs, opportunities, goals, and objectives;
▶ Project objectives;
▶ Project scope and WBS deliverables;
▶ Product design;
▶ Product development;
▶ Test strategy and test scenarios; and
▶ High-level requirements to more detailed requirements.
Attributes associated with each requirement can be recorded in the requirements traceability
matrix. These attributes help to define key information about the requirement. Typical attributes
used in the requirements traceability matrix may include: a unique identifier, a textual description
of the requirement, the rationale for inclusion, owner, source, priority, version, current status
(e.g., active, cancelled, deferred, added, approved, assigned, completed), and status date. Additional
attributes to ensure that the requirement has met stakeholders’ satisfaction may include stability,
complexity, and acceptance criteria. Figure 9-4 provides an example of a requirements traceability
matrix with its associated attributes.
Resource breakdown structure. A hierarchical representation of resources by category and type.
Examples of resource categories include but are not limited to labor, material, equipment, and
supplies. Resource types may include the skill level, grade level, required certifications, or other
information as appropriate to the project. See Figure 9-5 for an example.
Requirements Traceability Matrix
Project Name:
Cost Center:
Project Description:
Business Needs,
Associate Project WBS Product Product Test
ID Requirements Description Opportunities,
ID Objectives Deliverables Design Development Cases
Goals, Objectives
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.2.1
2.0
002 2.1
2.1.1
3.0
003 3.1
3.2
004 4.0
005 5.0
Figure 9-4. Example of a Requirements Traceability Matrix
Project
Personnel Material Equipment
Role Role Role Material Material Equipment Equipment
1 2 3 1 2 1 2
Level Level Grade
1 2 2
Figure 9-5. Sample Resource Breakdown Structure
Resource calendars. A resource calendar identifies the working days, shifts, start and end of normal
business hours, weekends, and public holidays when each specific resource is available. Information
on which resources (such as team resource, equipment, and material) are potentially available during
a planned activity period is used for estimating resource utilization. Resource calendars also specify
when, and for how long, identified team and physical resources will be available during the project.
This information may be at the activity or project level. This includes consideration of attributes such
as resource experience and/or skill level, as well as various geographical locations.
Resource management plan. The resource management plan is a component of the project
management plan that provides guidance on how project resources should be categorized, allocated,
managed, and released. It may be divided between the team management plan and physical resource
management plan according to the specifics of the project. The resource management plan may
include but is not limited to:
▶ Identification of resources. Methods for identifying and quantifying team and physical
resources needed.
▶ Acquiring resources. Guidance on how to acquire team and physical resources for the project.
▶ Roles and responsibilities:
▹
Role. The function assumed by, or assigned to, a person in the project. Examples of
project roles are civil engineer, business analyst, and testing coordinator.
▹
Authority. The right to apply project resources, make decisions, sign approvals, accept
deliverables, and influence others to carry out the work of the project. Examples of
decisions that need clear authority include the selection of a method for completing
an activity, quality acceptance criteria, and how to respond to project variances. Team
members operate best when their individual levels of authority match their individual
responsibilities.
▹
Responsibility. The assigned duties and work that a project team member is expected
to perform in order to complete the project’s activities.
▹
Competence. The skill and capacity required to complete assigned activities within the
project constraints. If project team members do not possess required competencies,
performance can be jeopardized. When such mismatches are identified, proactive
responses such as training, hiring, schedule changes, or scope changes are initiated.
▶ Project organization charts. A project organization chart is a graphic display of project
team members and their reporting relationships. It can be formal or informal, highly
detailed or broadly framed, based on the needs of the project. For example, the project
organization chart for a 3,000-person disaster response team will have greater detail than
a project organization chart for an internal, 20-person project.
▶ Project team resource management. Guidance on how project team resources should
be defined, staffed, managed, and eventually released.
▶ Training. Training strategies for team members.
▶ Team development. Methods for developing the project team.
▶ Resource control. Methods for ensuring adequate physical resources are available as
needed and that the acquisition of physical resources is optimized for project needs.
Includes information on managing inventory, equipment, and supplies throughout the
project life cycle.
▶ Recognition plan. Which recognition and rewards will be given to team members, and
when they will be given.
Resource requirements. Resource requirements identify the types and quantities of resources
required for each work package or activity in a work package and can be aggregated to determine the
estimated resources for each work package, each WBS branch, and the entire project. The amount of
detail and the level of specificity of the resource requirement descriptions can vary by application area.
The resource requirements’ documentation can include assumptions that were made in determining
which types of resources are applied, their availability, and what quantities are needed.
Risk register. A repository in which outputs of risk processes are recorded. The risk register captures
details of identified individual project risks. Record the results of the following processes in the risk
register as these processes are conducted throughout the project:
▶ Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis,
▶ Plan Risk Responses,
▶ Implement Risk Responses, and
▶ Monitor Risks.
The risk register may contain limited or extensive risk information depending on project variables
such as size and complexity.
When the Identify Risks process is performed, the content of the risk register may include but is not
limited to:
▶ List of identified risks. Each individual project risk is given a unique identifier in the risk
register. Identified risks are described in as much detail as required to ensure unambiguous
understanding. A structured risk statement may be used to distinguish risks from their
cause(s) and their effect(s).
▶ Potential risk owners. Where a potential risk owner has been identified during the Identify
Risks process, the risk owner is recorded in the risk register. This will be confirmed during
the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process.
▶ List of potential risk responses. Where a potential risk response has been identified
during the Identify Risks process, it is recorded in the risk register. This will be confirmed
during the Plan Risk Responses process.
Additional data may be recorded for each identified risk, depending on the risk register format
specified in the risk management plan. This may include:
▶ Short risk title,
▶ Risk category,
▶ Current risk status,
▶ One or more causes,
▶ One or more effects on objectives,
▶ Risk triggers (events or conditions that indicate that a risk is about to occur),
▶ WBS reference of affected activities, and
▶ Timing information (when risk was identified, when risk might occur, when risk may no
longer be relevant, and the deadline for taking action).
Risk management plan. The risk management plan is a component of the project management
plan and describes how risk management activities will be structured and performed. The risk
management plan may include some or all of the following elements:
▶ Risk strategy. Describes the general approach to managing risk on this project.
▶ Methodology. Defines the specific approaches, tools, and data sources that will be used
to perform risk management on the project.
▶ Roles and responsibilities. Defines the lead, support, and risk management team
members for each type of activity described in the risk management plan and clarifies
their responsibilities.
▶ Funding. Identifies the funds needed to perform activities related to the management
of risk. Establishes protocols for the application of contingency and management reserves.
▶ Timing. Defines when and how often the risk processes will be performed throughout
the project life cycle and establishes risk management activities for inclusion into the
project schedule.
▶ Risk categories. Provide a means for grouping individual project risks. A common way to
structure risk categories is with a risk breakdown structure (RBS), which is a hierarchical
representation of potential sources of risk (see example in Figure 9-6). An RBS helps the
project team consider the full range of sources from which individual project risks may
arise. This can be useful when identifying risks or when categorizing identified risks. The
organization may have a generic RBS to be used for all projects, or there may be several RBS
frameworks for different types of projects, or the project may develop a tailored RBS. Where
an RBS is not used, an organization may use a custom risk categorization framework, which
may take the form of a simple list of categories or a structure based on project objectives.
RBS LEVEL 0 RBS LEVEL 1 RBS LEVEL 2
1.1 Scope definition
1.2 Requirements definition
1.3 Estimates, assumptions, and constraints
1. TECHNICAL RISK 1.4 Technical processes
1.5 Technology
1.6 Technical interfaces
Etc.
2.1 Project management
2.2 Program/portfolio management
2.3 Operations management
2. MANAGEMENT RISK 2.4 Organization
2.5 Resourcing
2.6 Communication
0. ALL SOURCES OF Etc.
PROJECT RISK
3.1 Contractual terms and conditions
3.2 Internal procurement
3.3 Suppliers and vendors
3. COMMERCIAL RISK 3.4 Subcontracts
3.5 Client/customer stability
3.6 Partnerships and joint ventures
Etc.
4.1 Legislation
4.2 Exchange rates
4.3 Site/facilities
4. EXTERNAL RISK 4.4 Environmental/weather
4.5 Competition
4.6 Regulatory
Etc.
Figure 9-6. Excerpt from Sample Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS)
▶ Stakeholder risk appetite. The risk appetites of key stakeholders on the project are
recorded in the risk management plan, as they inform the details of the Plan Risk
Management process. Stakeholder risk appetite should be expressed as measurable risk
thresholds around each project objective. These thresholds will determine the acceptable
level of overall project risk exposure, and they are also used to inform the definitions of
probability and impacts to be used when assessing and prioritizing individual project risks.
▶ Definitions of risk probability and impacts. Definitions of risk probability and impact
levels are specific to the project context and reflect the risk appetite and thresholds of
the organization and key stakeholders. The project may generate specific definitions of
probability and impact levels, or it may start with general definitions provided by the
organization. The number of levels reflects the degree of detail required for the risk
process, with more levels used for a more detailed risk approach (typically five levels), and
fewer for a simple process (usually three). Table 9-2 provides an example of definitions
of probability and impacts against three project objectives. These scales can be used to
evaluate both threats and opportunities by interpreting the impact definitions as negative
for threats (delay, additional cost, and performance shortfall) and positive for opportunities
(reduced time or cost, and performance enhancement).
Table 9-2. Example of Definitions for Probability and Impacts
+/– IMPACT ON PROJECT OBJECTIVES
SCALE PROBABILITY
TIME COST QUALITY
Very High >70% >6 months >$5M Very significant impact on overall functionality
High 51-70% 3-6 months $1M-$5M Significant impact on overall functionality
Medium 31-50% 1-3 months $501K-$1M Some impact in key functional areas
Low 11-30% 1-4 weeks $100K-$500K Minor impact on overall functionality
Very Low 1-10% 1 week <$100K Minor impact on secondary functions
Nil <1% No change No change No change in functionality
Risk report. The risk report presents information on sources of overall project risk, together with
summary information on identified individual project risks. The risk report is developed progressively
throughout the risk processes. Include the results of the following processes in the risk report as
these processes are completed:
▶ Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis,
▶ Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis,
▶ Plan Risk Responses,
▶ Implement Risk Responses, and
▶ Monitor Risks.
When the Identify Risks process is completed, information in the risk report may include but is not
limited to:
▶ Sources of overall project risk, indicating which are the most important drivers of overall
project risk exposure; and
▶ Summary information on identified individual project risks, such as number of identified
threats and opportunities, distribution of risks across risk categories, metrics and trends, etc.
Additional information may be included in the risk report, depending on the reporting requirements
specified in the risk management plan.
Schedule baseline. The approved version of a schedule model that can be changed only through
formal change control procedures and is used as the basis for comparison to actual results. It is
accepted and approved by the appropriate stakeholders as the schedule baseline with baseline start
dates and baseline finish dates. During monitoring and controlling, the approved baseline dates are
compared to the actual start and finish dates to determine if variances have occurred. The schedule
baseline is a component of the project management plan.
Schedule data. The schedule data for the project schedule model is the collection of information
for describing and controlling the schedule. The schedule data includes, at a minimum, the schedule
milestones, schedule activities, activity attributes, and documentation of all identified assumptions
and constraints. The amount of additional data varies by application area. Information frequently
supplied as supporting detail includes but is not limited to:
▶ Resource requirements by time period, often in the form of a resource histogram;
▶ Alternative schedules, such as best case or worst case, not resource-leveled or resource-
leveled, or with or without imposed dates; and
▶ Applied schedule reserves.
Schedule data could also include such items as resource histograms, cashflow projections, order and
delivery schedules, or other relevant information.
Schedule forecasts. Estimates or predictions of conditions and events in the project’s future based
on information and knowledge available at the time the schedule is calculated. Forecasts are updated
and reissued based on work performance information provided as the project is executed. The
information is based on the project’s past performance and expected future performance based on
corrective or preventive actions. This can include earned value performance indicators, as well as
schedule reserve information that could impact the project in the future.
Schedule management plan. A component of the project or program management plan that
establishes the criteria and the activities for developing, monitoring, and controlling the schedule.
The schedule management plan may be formal or informal, highly detailed or broadly framed based
on the needs of the project, and it includes appropriate control thresholds.
The schedule management plan can establish the following:
▶ Project schedule model development. The scheduling methodology and the scheduling
tool to be used in the development of the project schedule model are specified.
▶ Release and iteration length. When using an adaptive life cycle, the timeboxed periods
for releases, waves, and iterations are specified. Timeboxed periods are durations during
which the team works steadily toward completion of a goal. Timeboxing helps to minimize
scope creep as it forces the teams to process essential features first, then other features
when time permits.
▶ Level of accuracy. The level of accuracy specifies the acceptable range used in determining
realistic activity duration estimates and may include an amount for contingencies.
▶ Units of measure. Each unit of measurement (such as staff hours, staff days, or weeks for
time measures, or meters, liters, tons, kilometers, or cubic yards for quantity measures)
is defined for each of the resources.
▶ Organizational procedures links. The work breakdown structure (WBS) provides the
framework for the schedule management plan, allowing for consistency with the estimates
and resulting schedules.
▶ Project schedule model maintenance. The process used to update the status and record
progress of the project in the schedule model during the execution of the project is defined.
▶ Control thresholds. Variance thresholds for monitoring schedule performance may be
specified to indicate an agreed-upon amount of variation to be allowed before some action
needs to be taken. Thresholds are typically expressed as percentage deviations from the
parameters established in the baseline plan.
▶ Rules of performance measurement. Earned value management (EVM) rules or other
physical measurement rules of performance measurement are set. For example, the
schedule management plan may specify:
▹
Rules for establishing percent complete,
▹
EVM techniques (e.g., baselines, fixed-formula, percent complete, etc.) to be
employed (for more specific information, refer to the Standard for Earned Value
Management [9]), and
▹
Schedule performance measurements, such as schedule variance (SV) and schedule
performance index (SPI), used to assess the magnitude of variation to the original
schedule baseline.
▶ Reporting formats. The formats and frequency for the various schedule reports are defined.
Scope baseline. The approved version of a scope statement, work breakdown structure (WBS), and
its associated WBS dictionary, which can be changed using formal change control procedures and is
used as a basis for comparison to actual results. It is a component of the project management plan.
Components of the scope baseline include:
▶ Project scope statement. The project scope statement includes the description of the
project scope, major deliverables, and exclusions.
▶ WBS. The WBS is a hierarchical decomposition of the total scope of work to be carried
out by the project team to accomplish the project objectives and create the required
deliverables. Each descending level of the WBS represents an increasingly detailed
definition of the project work.
▹
Work package. The lowest level of the WBS is a work package with a unique identifier.
These identifiers provide a structure for hierarchical summation of costs, schedule,
and resource information and form a code of accounts. Each work package is part of
a control account. A control account is a management control point where the scope,
budget, and schedule are integrated and compared to the earned value for performance
measurement. A control account has two or more work packages, though each work
package is associated with a single control account.
▹
Planning package. A control account may include one or more planning packages. A
planning package is a WBS component below the control account and above the work
package with known work content but without detailed schedule activities.
▶ WBS dictionary. The WBS dictionary is a document that provides detailed deliverable,
activity, and scheduling information about each component in the WBS. The WBS dictionary
is a document that supports the WBS. Most of the information included in the WBS
dictionary is created by other processes and added to this document at a later stage.
Information in the WBS dictionary may include but is not limited to:
▹
Code of account identifier,
▹
Description of work,
▹
Assumptions and constraints,
▹
Responsible organization,
▹
Schedule milestones,
▹
Associated schedule activities,
▹
Resources required,
▹
Cost estimates,
▹
Quality requirements,
▹
Acceptance criteria,
▹
Technical references, and
▹
Agreement information.
Scope management plan. The scope management plan is a component of the project management
plan and describes how the scope will be defined, developed, monitored, controlled, and validated.
The components of a scope management plan include:
▶ Process for preparing a project scope statement,
▶ Process that enables the creation of the work breakdown structure (WBS) from the detailed
project scope statement,
▶ Process that establishes how the scope baseline will be approved and maintained, and
▶ Process that specifies how formal acceptance of the completed project deliverables will
be obtained.
The scope management plan can be formal or informal, broadly framed or highly detailed, based on
the needs of the project.
Selected sellers. The selected sellers are those who have been judged to be in a competitive range
based on the outcome of the proposal or bid evaluation. Final approval of complex, high-value, high-
risk procurements will generally require organizational senior management approval prior to award.
Seller proposals. Seller proposals are prepared in response to a bid document package and form
the basic information that will be used by an evaluation body to select one or more successful
bidders (sellers). If the seller is going to submit a price proposal, good practice is to require that
it be separate from the technical proposal. The evaluation body reviews each submitted proposal
according to the source selection criteria and selects the seller that can best satisfy the buying
organization’s requirements.
Source selection criteria. In choosing evaluation criteria, the buyer seeks to ensure that the
proposal selected will offer the best quality for the services required. The source selection criteria
may include but are not limited to:
▶ Capability and capacity;
▶ Product cost and life cycle cost;
▶ Delivery dates;
▶ Technical expertise and approach;
▶ Specific relevant experience;
▶ Adequacy of the proposed approach and work plan in responding to the SOW;
▶ Key staff’s qualifications, availability, and competence;
▶ Financial stability of the firm;
▶ Management experience; and
▶ Suitability of the knowledge transfer program, including training.
For international projects, evaluation criteria may include “local content” requirements, for example,
participation by nationals among proposed key staff.
The specific criteria may be a numerical score, color-code, or a written description of how well the seller
satisfies the buying organization’s needs. The criteria will be part of a weighting system that can be
used to select a single seller that will be asked to sign a contract and establish a negotiating sequence
by ranking all of the proposals by the weighted evaluation scores assigned to each proposal.
Stakeholder engagement plan. The stakeholder engagement plan is a component of the project
management plan that identifies the strategies and actions required to promote productive
involvement of stakeholders in decision making and execution. It can be formal or informal and highly
detailed or broadly framed, based on the needs of the project and the expectations of stakeholders.
The stakeholder engagement plan may include but is not limited to specific strategies or approaches
for engaging with individuals or groups of stakeholders.
Stakeholder register. A project document including the identification, assessment, and classification
of project stakeholders. This document contains information about identified stakeholders that
includes but is not limited to:
▶ Identification information. Name, organizational position, location and contact details,
and role on the project.
▶ Assessment information. Major requirements, expectations, potential for influencing
project outcomes, and the phase of the project life cycle where the stakeholder has the
most influence or impact.
▶ Stakeholder classification. Internal/external, impact/influence/power/interest, upward/
downward/outward/sideward, or any other classification model chosen by the project
manager.
Team charter. The team charter is a document that establishes the team values, agreements, and
operating guidelines for the team. The team charter may include but is not limited to:
▶ Team values,
▶ Communication guidelines,
▶ Decision-making criteria and process,
▶ Conflict resolution process,
▶ Meeting guidelines, and
▶ Team agreements.
The team charter establishes clear expectations regarding acceptable behavior by project team
members. Early commitment to clear guidelines decreases misunderstandings and increases
productivity. Discussing areas such as codes of conduct, communication, decision making, and
meeting etiquette allows team members to discover values that are important to one another. The
team charter works best when the team develops it, or at least has an opportunity to contribute to
it. All project team members share responsibility for ensuring the rules documented in the team
charter are followed. The team charter can be reviewed and updated periodically to ensure a
continued understanding of the team ground rules and to orient and integrate new team members.
Team performance assessments. As project team development efforts such as training, team
building, and colocation are implemented, the project management team makes formal or informal
assessments of the project team’s effectiveness. Effective team development strategies and activities
are expected to increase the team’s performance, which increases the likelihood of meeting project
objectives.
The evaluation of a team’s effectiveness may include indicators such as:
▶ Improvements in skills that allow individuals to perform assignments more effectively,
▶ Improvements in competencies that help team members perform better as a team,
▶ Reduced staff turnover rate, and
▶ Increased team cohesiveness where team members share information and experiences
openly and help each other to improve the overall project performance.
As a result of conducting an evaluation of the team’s overall performance, the project management
team can identify the specific training, coaching, mentoring, assistance, or changes required to
improve the team’s performance. This should also include identifying the appropriate or required
resources necessary to achieve and implement the improvements identified in the assessment.
Test and evaluation documents. Project documents that describe the activities used to determine if
the product meets the quality objectives stated in the quality management plan. Test and evaluation
documents can be created based on industry needs and the organization’s templates. They are
used to evaluate the achievement of the quality objectives. These documents may include dedicated
checklists and detailed requirements traceability matrices as part of the document.
Verified deliverables. Completed project deliverables that have been checked and confirmed for
correctness through the Control Quality process. A goal of the Control Quality process is to determine
the correctness of deliverables. The results of performing the Control Quality process are verified
deliverables that become an input to the Validate Scope process for formalized acceptance. If there
were any change requests or improvements related to the deliverables, they may be changed,
inspected, and reverified.
Virtual teams. Groups of people with a shared goal who fulfill their roles with little or no time spent
meeting face to face.
The use of virtual teams creates new possibilities when acquiring project team members. Virtual
teams can be defined as groups of people with a shared goal who fulfill their roles with little or no
time spent meeting face to face. The availability of communication technology such as email, audio
conferencing, social media, web-based meetings, and videoconferencing has made virtual teams
feasible. The virtual team model makes it possible to:
▶ Form teams of people from the same organization who live in widespread geographic areas;
▶ Add special expertise to a project team even though the expert is not in the same
geographic area;
▶ Incorporate employees who work from home offices;
▶ Form teams of people who work different shifts, hours, or days;
▶ Include people with mobility limitations or disabilities;
▶ Move forward with projects that would have been held or canceled due to travel
expenses; and
▶ Save the expense of offices and all physical equipment needed for employees.
The use of virtual teams can bring benefits such as the use of more skilled resources, reduced costs,
less travel and relocation expenses, and the proximity of team members to suppliers, customers, or
other key stakeholders. Virtual teams can use technology to create an online team environment where
the team can store files, use conversations threads to discuss issues, and keep a team calendar.
Communication planning becomes increasingly important in a virtual team environment. Additional
time may be needed to set clear expectations, facilitate communications, develop protocols for
resolving conflicts, include people in decision making, understand cultural differences, and share
credit in successes.
Work performance data. The raw observations and measurements identified during activities
being performed to carry out the project work. Data are often viewed as the lowest level of detail
from which information is derived by other processes. Data are gathered through work execution
and passed to the controlling processes for further analysis.
Examples of work performance data include work completed, key performance indicators (KPIs),
technical performance measures, actual start and finish dates of schedule activities, story points
completed, deliverables status, schedule progress, number of change requests, number of defects,
actual costs incurred, actual durations, etc.
Work performance information. The performance data collected from controlling processes,
analyzed in comparison with project management plan components, project documents, and other
work performance information.
To become work performance information, the work performance data are compared with the
project management plan components, project documents, and other project variables. This
comparison helps to indicate how the project is performing.
Specific work performance metrics for scope, schedule, budget, and quality are defined at the start
of the project as part of the project management plan. Performance data are collected during the
project and compared to the plan and other variables to provide a context for work performance.
For example, work performance data on cost may include funds that have been expended. However,
to be useful, that data should be compared to the budget, the work that was performed, the resources
used to accomplish the work, and the funding schedule. This additional information provides the
context to determine if the project is on budget or if there is a variance. It also indicates the degree of
variance from the plan, and by comparing it to the variance thresholds in the project management plan
it can indicate if preventive or corrective action is required. Interpreting work performance data and the
additional information provides a sound foundation for making project decisions.
Work performance reports. The physical or electronic representation of work performance information
compiled in project documents, which is intended to generate decisions, actions, or awareness. They
are circulated to project stakeholders through the communication processes as defined in the project
communications management plan.
Examples of work performance reports include status reports and progress reports. Work performance
reports may contain earned value graphs and information, trend lines and forecasts, reserve burndown
charts, defect histograms, contract performance information, and risk summaries. They can be
presented as dashboards, heat reports, stoplight charts, or other representations useful for creating
awareness and generating decisions and actions.