SECTION FOUR
Trading Up and Giving Back
CHAPTER 22
Be Interesting
Iremember when being a marketer was simpler. Essentially,
marketers were expected to create an ad, get it to the consumer
through one of the few available media sources, and then sit back
and wait.
Those days are good and gone. The way the world speaks and
listens has changed radically. And the tools we use to communicate
are changing at a similar pace. As access to consumers grows, so
does consumer power. They can choose from hordes of entertain
ment venues, use software tools to filter out unwanted messages,
and shoot down surviving messages with a heightened sense of
cynicism. It's just not as easy to be heard. Brand loyalty is tougher
to achieve. Conventional advertising and marketing just won't cut
it—and neither will traditional thinking among those who want to
get their message across. The CMO of today and tomorrow must
be a strategist, a technologist, creative, and always focused on the
sales and financial return on his marketing investments. Not a lot
of individuals, consulting firms, or agencies combine all those
traits. As a result, the life of the CMO is a lonely one, and the life of
the CEO who expects all this is too often a frustrated one.
My growing sense of these changes, along with conversations
with respected marketers, is the main reason I founded Ferrazzi-
Greenlight, to focus on marketing strategies and programs that
push the marketing spend closer to actual sales. To count less on
big broadcast advertising and more on building personalized loy
alty between clients and their customers. That might mean creat
ing a loyalty program for a retailer similar to what we operated at
Starwood Hotels. Or designing an infomercial for a complex new
product launch. Or facilitating an "ambassador's program" for a
large engineering firm that targeted just 500 customers, prospects,
and infiuencers in the United States.
I hope it's not a surprise that I see effective marketing as just
building relationships with customers and prospective customers.
Let me translate this macro trend to a very personal scene that
repeats itself over and over again when I give lectures at colleges. It
will take place just before or after I've given my talk. A student will
muster the nerve to approach me, and admiring as I am of such
initiative, I'll be very receptive. Then, remarkably, nothing will be
said beyond, "Hi, I'm so-and-so and your talk was great." Perhaps
I'll ask what they got out of it or how they see what I talked about
playing out around them in the world. Too often, my attempts are
met with comments like "Oh, I don't know," or "I just think what
you said was great. I'm not sure I could ever do all that..."
Oh, wow, I'd think, it was fantastic talking with you, but I've
got some bathroom tiles that need cleaning. Not to be too rough
here, but how can you talk to someone when they have nothing to
say? How can you offer your company or your network anything
of value if you have not thought about how you want to stand out
and differentiate yourself in building that relationship?
Marketers and networkers alike take heed: Be interesting! All
that you've read thus far doesn't relieve you of the responsibility of
being someone worth talking to, and even better, worth talking
about. Virtually everyone new you meet in a situation is asking
themselves a variation on one question: "Would I want to spend
an hour eating lunch with this person?"
Consultants call it the airport question. In the lengthy interview
process that that industry has become famous for—a peppering of
complicated case studies and logic-testing puzzles—the one ques
tion consultants use to choose one person over a pool of equally
talented candidates is the one question they ask only of themselves:
"If I were trapped in John F. Kennedy Airport for a few hours [and
all travel-weary consultants inevitably spend too much time in air
ports], would I want to spend it with this person?"
Have you mentioned in conversation your large jazz collec
tion, or the time you spent in the Ivory Coast, or your contrarian
views on some political debate? Squeeze a little time into your
schedule to keep up with what's going on in the world. Pay atten
tion to interesting tidbits you hear, and work to remember them
so that you can pass them on to people you meet. Get a daily
subscription to the New York Times or the Wall Street Journal.
Remember, people don't only hire people they like, they hire peo
ple that they think can make them and their companies better.
That means someone with an expanded view of the world. It
means you need to be aware of your intellectual property, and
what you have to say that others might benefit from. It shows
you're interested and involved in the world around you.
What happens when you don't have a platform of ideas to
defend? When you're running for office, you lose an election.
In my sophomore year at Yale, I ran for New Haven City Coun
cil. The party in New Haven wanted an outspoken, presentable
candidate to run against the less-than-exciting opposing candi
date. I had been known through my involvement in the Political
Union as a very young chairman, having started one of the
first fraternities on campus (Sigma Chi), and therefore had some
name recognition. When offered the opportunity, I jumped at it. I
didn't have a thought as to what I had to offer or why New Haven
might want me as its representative. This was more ego than fore
thought.
To this day, my loss in that election sticks in my craw. I actually
refused to dig in and really campaign, to learn the local issues.
My opponent, Joel Ratner, developed a deep local platform and
took to the streets and dining halls. I shied away from that level
of engagement, expecting that my dynamic style would carry
the day.
Joel was emboldened by his ideas, and his passion galvanized
voters. I, on the other hand, just thought it would be cool to run
for an elected office. After all, I was recruited. I didn't seek the
office, and I told the party up front that my studies and other lead
ership responsibilities had to come first.
Well, my defeat was embarrassing, and it was my own fault.
The experience taught me an important lesson. No matter what
organization I represented or what professional avenue I pursued
in the future, all my efforts had to be powered by a deep passion
and a set of beliefs that went well beyond my own personal bene
fit. To move others, you have to speak beyond yourself. Boldly
putting yourself out there was one thing, and a good thing, but
that wasn't enough. There was a difference between getting atten
tion and getting attention for your desire to change the world.
Congratulations, Joel, I hear you did a great job. The better man
clearly won in that race.
Be a Person of Content: Have a Unique Point of View
Being interesting isn't just about learning how to become a
good conversationalist. Don't get me wrong, that is important, but
you need a well-thought-out point of view. I honestly hope from
now on you'll be a newspaper-reading maniac ready to engage the
topics of the day with anyone you meet. But being interesting and
having content are very different. The former involves talking
intelligently about politics, sports, travel, science, or whatever
you'll need as a ticket of admission to any conversation. Content
involves a much more specialized form of knowledge. It's know
ing what you have that most others do not. It's your differentia
tion. It's your expertise. It's the message that will make your brand
unique, attracting others to become a part of your network.
Being known is just notoriety. But being known for something
is entirely different. That's respect. You have to believe in some
thing, as Joel Ratner did, for people to believe in you.
Once I learned my lesson, I wasn't going to repeat it. I was not
just going to be another generalist. I was going to have a unique
point of view, an expertise. My first job out of college at Imperial
Chemical Industries, I mastered the ins and outs of Total Quality
Management. Later, when I worked at Deloitte, reengineering was
my hook. At Starwood, I pushed for direct marketing. Later, I
mastered interactive marketing. Today, I've wrapped all my expe
riences into a set of beliefs around the radically changing dynam
ics of marketing overall and its evolution toward relationship
marketing: moving marketing dollars closer to sales.
In every job and at every stage in my career, I had some exper
tise, some content that differentiated me from others and made
me unique, made me more valuable in my relationships with
others and the company I worked for. It created precious oppor
tunities for me to gain credibility and visibility in my field. Con
tent is a cause, an idea, trend, or skill—the unique subject matter
on which you are the authority.
What will set you apart from everybody else is the relentless-
ness you bring to learning and presenting and selling your content.
Take, for example, my experience when I was hired as CEO of YaYa.
The company's board was aware of how I had used reengineering
to heighten the market's perception of Deloitte, and how, at Star
wood, the idea of changing the way the hospitality industry
branded itself generated a wave of publicity. They knew that the
ability to capture a buzz-worthy message and get it into the
crowded marketplace of ideas would prove crucial for a new com
pany whose product was totally untested. This seemed right for
me. I was a "market maker": someone who could create excitement
and belief around YaYa's point of view. The problem was coming
up with the credible and unique point of view that people were
ready to buy. That was our challenge, or the company would fail.
One of our first goals when I came to YaYa was to find a hook
that could transform the company's current lack of sales while
also generating broader intrigue in the marketplace, and really
create a market. I started, as I always do, by immersing myself in
the subject. I became a voracious reader and would spend hours
late at night checking out a variety of articles, analyst reports,
books, and Web sites. I talked to CEOs, journalists, and consul
tants who specialized in the interactive advertising industry,
games industry, and training world.
This stage can be quite frustrating. There's a huge learning
curve to get up to speed. Suddenly you're confronted with a
miasma of numbers, data points, differing opinions, and a boat
load of disparate new information. On some occasions, as was the
case with TQM and reengineering, you can acquire content by
simply appropriating another person's innovative ideas and
become a leader in distributing and applying those ideas. On
other occasions, as with YaYa, we had to develop the content from
scratch. That meant taking all the disparate dots of information
and connecting them in a way others had not.
There should be no mystique around dot connecting among
those who are continually at the forefront of business innovation.
Remember those wise words of Mark McCormack in his book
What They Don't Teach You at Harvard Business School: "Creativity
in business is often nothing more than making connections that
everyone else has almost thought of. You don't have to reinvent
the wheel, just attach it to a new wagon."
As my immersion process continued, I became more and more
frustrated that the marketing and training field was not taking
advantage of the two powerful new mediums that YaYa was based
on—the Internet and video games. As I learned more about mar
keting and training online, I drew analogies to other new mediums
that changed the landscape. I reminded marketers that when we
first transitioned from radio to television, all we did was put a cam
era in front of a radio announcer and call it advertising. It took a
while to settle into the medium and its new rules. Here again, with
the Internet, we were applying old models to a new environment.
The Net was all about interactivity and community building,
where concepts or just jokes were spread around the world in
moments. And yet marketers were just taking old advertising ideas,
like billboards and bumper stickers, and putting them online in the
form of banner ads. That those ads weren't successful should have
come as no surprise. Training had a similar argument. Would you
rather engage in learning in a fun interactive environment or the
traditional and stale forms of training that employees were being
force-fed today? Which would be more effective?
Then you had the games world in general. The startling num
bers suggested an untapped phenomenon. In 1999, games rev
enues surpassed movie box-office revenues. And the demographic
of online gamers was changing radically as content was branching
out to cater to adults and women. The average age of online
gamers is now thirty-five, 49 percent of whom are women. I also
learned of a German company that developed a cool turkey-shoot
game for Johnnie Walker that got so many downloads, the prime
minister commented that the game had become a drain on
national productivity. Still, no one thought of games as anything
but niche entertainment.
With the information at hand, I now had to connect the dots
and find that new wagon. This is actually the fun part. You start in
a fantasy world with no limitations or constraints. Instead of
bashing my head against the wall trying harder and harder to solve
a specific problem, I like to ask the question: "If I could use some
magical potion in this situation, what could I do with all this new
information?" Such fantasizing doesn't have to be, and often
shouldn't be, a solitary endeavor. I get other interested parties—
employees, colleagues, and insiders—to help me create wild sce
narios and ask seemingly absurd questions. I did this with a small
group, and we threw out each and every fantastical idea that came
to us. By fantasizing, using the magic potion, and including a group
of people to riff without rules, we were able to use our creativity to
find a way forward.
These fantasy sessions were productive. We started to imagine
how games might be applied to more than just leisure and enter
tainment. We started to question assumptions such as what busi
ness we were in (was it entertainment, marketing, or services?),
what product we should offer (was it games, advertising, training,
consulting, enabling technology?), and who our real customers
could be (geeky adolescents, adults, Fortune 500 companies?). We
started to visualize how we might connect the gaming medium—
which had a large and growing demographic of users—and the
Internet medium—which had a large and growing group of com
panies trying to figure out how best to use it to interact with their
customers.
As an entrepreneur or an employee, you have the creative abilities
to make similar connections in your own industry. How do I know?
Because everyone has them! Your abilities may be stored away or
infrequently used, but they are there. The question is, how do you
put them to work for you? We went to work to crack this nut.
The results were significant. We realized there was an opportu
nity to not just sell games or sell advertising onto game sites but to
create interactive games online to be used as a powerful and new
immersive form of advertising. When people redefined YaYa as a
marketing company rather than a video-game company, we real-
ized our customers weren't the end users; our real customers were
the companies who wanted access to the end users. The shift in
focus allowed us to see games less as a product than a medium
itself, able to deliver any kind of message one wanted to send. You
could use games to train and educate employees, as advertising
vehicles, in brand-awareness campaigns, in direct one-to-one
marketing, as a means for collecting data on the preferences of
customers, and so on. Where television eventually turned to com
mercials to replace the on-air radio personality, games could
replace banner ads on the Internet.
And thus the unique point of view for YaYa was born. We
began to trumpet advergaming and edutainment as the next pow
erful communications medium, an untapped marketing segment
perfect for product placements, branded gaming events, custom
games-related training for businesses, and on and on. It wasn't
long before I was not only attending games conferences but also
speaking at them.
Once a resonating pitch is perfected, getting attention is less of
a problem. Journalists are hungry for ideas. Getting access to them
is often as simple as calling the magazine or newspaper they work
for, which can be found on their Web site, and asking to speak
with the reporter that covers your beat. I've never met a journalist
with a gatekeeper. Moreover, I've never had my calls go unre-
turned after leaving a message that said, "I've got the inside scoop
on how the gaming industry is going to revolutionize marketing.
I've appreciated your work for a long time now; I believe you are
the right person to break this story."
I've been leaving those kinds of messages on reporters' voice
mail for years, and reporters are hugely appreciative. Most of the
time, the story doesn't even involve my company or me. I'm just
building the credibility I'll need when the day comes to make my
own pitch. Which is probably why, today, I know people in top
positions at almost every major business magazine in the country.
I've had fellow CEOs who view, say, the Wall Street Journal or
Forbes as impenetrable institutions; they shake their head in won
derment at how over and over again, no matter where I'm at or
what organization I represent, I never fail to get press. The answer
is that I understand and give them what they need: great stories.
However, I've also had a lot of help. Once I had developed
YaYa's unique point of view, for example, I brought it to the
ad agencies. It was interactive agency KPE that brought YaYa and
advergaming to market. They were the agency to "discover" us and
what we were doing. And then the big games companies got
involved. I went to the most progressive guys I knew, people like
Bobby Kotick, the CEO of Activision who, in a partnership with
the Nielsen Company, put his company's influence and money
behind measuring how effective games were as a medium for
advertisers. Bobby and I would be on CNN or CNBC back-to-
back plugging each other's ideas.
"Keith, what's your secret? Bribes, blackmail—come on, just
tell me," one CEO friend jokingly asked after YaYa appeared in a
major spread in Fortune, while his own company, which was four
times larger than YaYa, and several years older, had barely made it
into its own newsletter.
So I told him: "Create a story about your company and the
ideas it embodies that readers will care about. That's your content.
Then share it. Have you ever picked up the phone and actually
talked to a reporter about why you think what you do is so special?
You cannot outsource this to PR; journalists deal with thousands
of PR people a day. Who's going to be more passionate and more
informed than you? You're the expert on what you do."
They Can't Outsource Content Creators
We've seen how content helped transform a company into a
recognizable brand. But what if YOU are the brand? What's your
content? What hooks are you selling? The same process we used to
figure out how to make YaYa interesting to the marketplace can be
applied to making you interesting to your network and beyond.
A unique point of view is one of the only ways to ensure that
today, tomorrow, and a year from now you'll have a job.
It used to be that two arms, two legs, and an MBA were a one
way ticket to the executive office. That's barely the price of entry
these days. In America's information economy, we frame our
competitive advantage in terms of knowledge and innovation.
That means today's market values creativity over mere compe
tence and expertise over general knowledge. If what you do can be
done by anyone, there will always be someone willing to do it for
less. Witness all those jobs moving offshore to Bangladesh and
Bangalore. The one thing no one has figured out how to outsource
is the creation of ideas. You can't replace people who day in and
day out offer the kind of content or unique ways of thinking that
promise their company an edge.
Content creators have always been in high demand. They get
promotions. They're responsible for the Big Ideas. They're regu
larly asked to speak at conferences and are featured in newspapers
and magazines. Everyone within their company—and many
within their industry—knows their name. They are the celebrities
of their little worlds, and their fame comes from always seeming
to be one step ahead.
So how did they get that way? The easiest route is by expertise.
As I look back on my career, the recipe seems straightforward:
I'd latch on to the latest, most cutting-edge idea in the business
world. I'd immerse myself in it, getting to know all the thought
leaders pushing the idea and all the literature available. I'd then
distill that into a message about the idea's broader impact to others
and how it could be applied in the industry I worked in. That was
the content. Becoming an expert was the easy part. I simply did
what experts do: I taught, wrote, and spoke about my expertise.
At ICI, my first job after college, I talked my way into a man
agement-training program by convincing the interviewer to take
on a liberal arts major as an experiment. Every trainee who had
ever been hired prior to that had some fancy degree in chemical
engineering, material sciences, or something technical like that.
There was no way I was going to advance at ICI based on my
engineering expertise. In my first few months of the program,
however, I noticed that Total Quality Management was all the
rage, one of those consultant-driven business trends that light the
business world on fire every few years.
In my free time, I studied all the texts that were available. A few
months into my job, I volunteered my "expertise," citing my back
ground in organizational behavior (from my total of two under
graduate courses I had taken!). With one stroke, I became one of
ICI's three go-to guys when it came to TQM. The thing is, I only
really became an expert once I started trying to teach the disci
pline within the company. I would go on to parlay my experience
into giving speeches, writing articles, and connecting with some
of the top business minds in the country. After a short period, I
even persuaded the industrial giant ICI to craft a new position for
me within a newly forming group as one of the leaders of TQM in
North America.
There's no better way to learn something, and become an
expert at it, than to have to teach it. Some of the best CEOs I know
refuse to turn away business even when it might call for skills or
experience that their company doesn't have. These CEOs see such
a scenario as an opportunity. "We can do that," they'll say. In the
process, both the CEO and their employees learn skills they need.
They jump at trying something new and they get the job done. In
fact, after reading this book, there's no reason you couldn't put
together a course on relationship building or content creation at
your local community college. You'll learn in preparation, and
gain even more interacting with students.
In short, forget your job title and forget your job description
(for the moment, at least). Starting today, you've got to figure out
what exceptional expertise you're going to master that will pro
vide real value to your network and your company.
How do you start?
Well, there's the easy way and then there's the hard way, and
I've done both. As I did at ICI and Deloitte, you can find someone
who has already connected the dots and become an expert of their
content. That's the easy way.
The hard way is connecting the dots on your own. The bad
news is there's no concrete blueprint or step-by-step guide for this
process. The good news is that creating content is not an act of
divine inspiration or something reserved for the brilliant. Though
I imagine both brilliance and inspiration could come in handy, I
don't claim either in abundance. Instead, I've relied on some
guidelines, a few habits, and a couple of techniques that have
proven wonderfully useful.
Here are ten tips on helping you on your way toward becom
ing an expert:
1. Get out in front and analyze the trends and
opportunities on the cutting edge.
Foresight gives you and your company the flexibility to adapt to
change. Creativity allows you to take advantage of it. Today, where
innovation has become more important than production, not
moving forward means going backward. Early adaptors, trend-
spotters, knowledge brokers, change agents, and all those who
know where their industry is heading and what next big ideas are
coming down the pike have become the stars of the business world.
Identify the people in your industries who always seem to be
out in front, and use all the relationship skills you've acquired to
connect with them. Take them to lunch. Read their newsletters. In
fact, read everything you can. Online, there are hundreds of indi
viduals distilling information, analyzing it, and making prognos
tications. These armchair analysts are the eyes and ears of
innovation. Now get online and read, read, read. Subscribe to
magazines, buy books, and talk to the smartest people you can
find. Eventually, all this knowledge will build on itself, and you'll
start making connections others aren't.
2. Ask seemingly stupid questions.
If you ask questions that are like no other, you get results that are
unlike any that the world has seen. How many people have the
courage to ask those questions? The answer: all the people respon
sible for the greatest innovations. "Don't you think having all your
MP3s on a little Walkman-like device would be cool?" Thus, the
iPod. "Why can't we view our pictures immediately?" Thus, the
instant photographic industry. "People sure like burgers and fries.
Why not give it to them quickly?" Thus, McDonald's and the fast-
food industry.
The power of innocence in business is wonderfully depicted in
a scene from the movie Big, where Tom Hanks plays a kid trans
formed into an adult. In one poignant moment, Hanks is sitting in
on an executive meeting at a major toy company, and one vice
president is PowerPointing his way through a presentation about
a new toy. All the numbers work. All the graphs point to a success
ful product launch. And yet Hanks's childlike innocence prompts
him to say, "I don't get it." In actually playing with the toy, as he
had, all the graphs and numbers didn't matter: The toy simply
wasn't fun. Sometimes the numbers do lie. Sometimes all the
PowerPoint presentations in the world won't provide cover for a
company that has forgotten to ask the most basic of questions.
For years, the people running the companies that produced
games believed they were in the entertainment business. I asked,
"What if we're really in the marketing business?"
3. Know yourself and your talents.
I had no chance competing with the science geeks at ICI. In devel
oping an expertise that highlighted my strengths, I was able to
overcome my weaknesses. The trick is not to work obsessively on
the skills and talents you lack, but to focus and cultivate your
strengths so that your weaknesses matter less. I'd apply the 80/20
rule in that you should spend some time getting better at your
weaknesses but really focus on building your strengths.
4. Always learn.
You have to learn more to earn more. All content-creators are
readers or at least deep questioners or conversationalists. They're
also sticklers when it comes to self-development. Your program of
self-development should include reading books and magazines,
listening to educational tapes, attending three to five conferences
a year, taking a course or two, and developing relationships with
the leaders in your field.
5. Stay healthy.
Research has discovered that at midafternoon, due to sleep depri
vation, the average corporate executive today has the alertness level
of a seventy-year-old. You think that executive is being creative
or connecting the dots? Not a chance. Sounds hokey, but you have
to take care of yourself—your body, mind, and spirit—to be at
your best. As hectic as my schedule can get, I never miss a workout
(five times a week). I try to take a five-day vacation every other
month (I do check e-mails and catch up on reading). I go on a
spirituality retreat once a month, even if it's a one-day local med
itation retreat. And I do something spiritual each week—usually
church. That gives me energy to allow me to keep my otherwise
twenty-four-hour schedule.
6. Expose yourself to unusual experiences.
When management guru Peter Drucker was asked for one thing
that would make a person better in business, he responded, "Learn
to play the violin." Different experiences give rise to different
tools. Find out what your kids are interested in and why. Stimulate
your creativity. Learn about things that are out of the mainstream.
Travel to weird and exotic places. Knowing one's own industry
and one's native markets is not enough to compete in the future.
Take a deep and boundless curiosity about things outside your
own profession and comfort zone.
7. Don't get discouraged.
My first e-mail to the CEO of ICI regarding TQM was never
returned. To this day, I face rejection on a regular basis. If you're
going to be creative, cutting edge, out of the mainstream, you'd
better get used to rockin' the boat. And guess what—when you're
rockin' the boat, there will always be people who will try and push
you off. That's the bet you have to take. Deeply committed profes
sionals need to know the score: Passion keeps you going through
the rough times come hell or high water, and both will come.
There will be continual changes and challenges requiring you to
be persistent and committed. Focus on the results and keep your
eyes open for what is happening on the edges of your industry.
8. Know the new technology.
No industry moves quicker or places more emphasis on innova
tion. You don't need to be a "techno geek," but you do need to
understand the impact of technology on your business and be
able to leverage it to your benefit. Adopt a techno geek, or at least
hire or sire one.
9. Develop a niche.
Successful small businesses that gain renown establish themselves
within a carefully selected market niche that they can realistically
hope to dominate. Individuals can do the same thing. Think of
several areas where your company underperforms and choose to
focus on the one area that is least attended to.
A former mentee of mine, for example, works for a growing
start-up that offers a new kind of pet product. Not long after he
was hired, he noted that one of the countless issues the start-up
was struggling with was pricey postal rates that were cutting into
the company's margins. Frankly, that's not the kind of issue that
registers very high up on the totem pole of priorities for a start
up, but then again, this mentee wasn't very high up either.
He took it upon himself to research the problem by calling the
official responsible for small business at UPS, FedEx, and others. A
few weeks later, he sent a detailed memo to the CEO about how
the company could reduce its postal costs. The CEO was delighted.
The mentee's niche expertise in mail branded the young man as
a valuable up-and-comer in the company, and these days, he's
developing expertise in issues much farther up the totem pole.
10. Follow the money.
Creativity is worthless if it can't be applied. The bottom line for
your content has to be: This will make us more money. The
lifeblood of any company is sales and cash flow. All great ideas are
meaningless in business until someone pays for it.
CONNECTORS' HALL OF FAME PROFILE
Dalai Lama
"Use your content to tell stones that move people."
Known as a world leader, holy man, diplomat, hero, and the
Tibetan Ghandi, the Dalai Lama simply prefers to be recognized as
"a simple Buddhist monk—no more, no less."
On his great ascent toward world renown ever since his escape
from his homeland in Tibet—fleeing the occupying armies of China
in the late 1950s—this unique national figure has captured the
public imagination, raised millions of dollars, and rallied celebri
ties, politicians, and laymen alike to his cause of reclaiming his
homeland.
What can the aspiring connector learn from this deeply modest
man?
The answer: Powerful content communicated in a compelling
story can energize your network to help you achieve your mission.
Because here's the thing with the spiritual leader of the Tibetan
people: Folks give him money, love, and support even though he's
peddling neither product nor service. Folks pay him, big time, even
though he makes no promises about a bountiful return on invest
ment. Folks pay just to hear him speak about life in general, or the
struggles of Tibet, his non-nation nation.
You may have thought that a degree in business, or better yet an
MBA, was needed to become a leader or person with content. Not
true. The Dalai Lama doesn't have a single degree. He does, how
ever, deliver a simple but profound message of world peace and
compassion packaged in colorful stories and anecdotes—a mes
sage that earned him the Nobel Peace Prize in 1 989.
Now you might be thinking: "Wait a minute. There's no way you
can compare my white-collar pursuit to connect—and the stories I'd
be telling to win friends and influence people—to the stories that
the Dalai Lama has to share. I eat three meals a day. He's been
without a country since the Fifties."
And you'd be correct. Your story won't be as compelling as his.
But your storyte///ng can be. Here's how:
In telling a gripping story, the Dalai Lama understands that the
message must be both simple and universal. Journalist Chris Colin,
in speculating why the Dalai Lama's cause is so popular, wrote,
"Perhaps the clarity of the atrocity resonates in the West, where few
international disputes seem so cut and dried . . . Here, in a nation
nostalgic for the seemingly black-and-white struggles of the compar
atively simpler past, the 'Free Tibet' cause has wings."
Though he is one of the most learned scholars of one of the most
complex of all the world's philosophies, the Dalai Lama is sure not
only to present his cause in a clear, simple-to-understand vision, but
he also goes to great lengths to show how the cause relates to us all.
The most gripping stories are those concerning identity—who
we are, where we've come from, and where we are going. They
tap into something common to all people. The Dalai Lama tells us
that to be concerned with the Tibetan people is to be concerned
with yourself. "The more we care for the happiness of others," he
says, "the greater our own sense of well-being becomes." In this
way, he shows how the basic concerns of all people—happiness
based on contentment, appeasement of suffering, and the forging
of meaningful relationships—can act as the foundation for universal
ethics in today's world. Thus, he appeals to his cause by appealing
to everyone's cause.
That doesn't mean your business, your resume, or whatever con
tent you're trying to pitch has to actually be oversimplified or overly
universal. But you should figure out how to spin your yarn in a fash
ion that a) is simple to understand, and b) everybody can relate to.
Another way to think about this is to ask yourself, "How does my
content help others answer who they are, where they are from, and
where they are going?"
On some level, it's still baffling why anyone gives money to the
Tibetan cause. For the Tibetan cause, arguably, is a lost one; after
four decades, China still shows no signs of reversing itself.
And still, the Dalai Lama persuades people to donate their
money and energy. How does he do it? One thing he does is use
facts and historical examples within his stories to stoke our pas
sions. He does not, as a businessperson might do with graphs and
analysis, attempt to logically convince us of his position. He makes
us feel his position. For example, check out this Q&A, from a 1 997
interview in Mother Jones:
Q: What do you think it will take for China to change its
policy toward Tibet?
Dalai Lama: It will take two things: first, a Chinese leader
ship that looks forward instead of backward, that looks
toward integration with the world and cares about both world
opinion and the will of [China's] own democracy movement;
second, a group of world leaders that listens to the concerns
of their own people with regard to Tibet, and speaks firmly to
the Chinese about the urgent need of working out a solution
based on truth and justice. We do not have these two things
today, and so the process of bringing peace to Tibet is stalled.
But we must not lose our trust in the power of truth. Every
thing is always changing in the world. Look at South Africa,
the former Soviet Union, and the Middle East. They still have
many problems, setbacks as well as breakthroughs, but basi
cally changes have happened that were considered unthink
able a decade ago.
What truly moves us as human beings, what prompts us into
action, is emotion. Despite the odds, the Dalai Lama makes us
believe that the seemingly impossible is, in fact, possible. In your
own stories, use emotion to convince your doubters that under
dogs sometimes win and Goliaths sometimes crumble.
Follow the example of this simple Buddhist monk who chan
nels his charm and warmth into compelling stories that energize a
diverse swath of people into action. In this new era of brands, in
an economy that values emotions over numbers, storytellers will
have the edge. As Michael Hattersley wrote in a Harvard Business
Review article, "Too often, we make the mistake of thinking of
business as a matter of pure rational calculation, something that
in a few years computers will handle better than humans. One
hears this in conference room and corridor: 'What do the num
bers indicate?" Just give me the facts."Let's weigh the evidence and
make the right decision.'And yet, truth to tell, few talents are more
important to managerial success than knowing how to tell a good
story."
So forget bullet points and slide shows. When you've figured
out what your content is, tell an inspiring story that will propel
your friends and associates into action with spirit and fearlessness,
motivated and mobilized by your simple but profound story
telling.