The Project Environment
Projects exist and operate in environments that may have an influence on them. These influences
can have a favorable or unfavorable impact on the project. Two major categories of influences are
enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) and organizational process assets (OPAs).
EEFs originate from the environment outside of the project, and often outside of the enterprise.
EEFs may have an impact at the organizational, portfolio, program, or project level.
OPAs are internal to the organization. These may arise from the organization itself, a portfolio,
a program, another project, or a combination of these. Figure 2-1 shows the breakdown of project
influences into EEFs and OPAs.
Influences
Internal
EEFs
OPAs
Processes, Organizational
External Internal Documents, and Knowledge
Templates Repository
Figure 2-1. Project Influences
In addition to EEFs and OPAs, governance plays a significant role in the life cycle of the project
(see Section 2.3).
2.1 ENTERPRISE ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) refer to conditions, not under the control of the
project team, that influence, constrain, or direct the project. These conditions can be internal
and/or external to the organization. EEFs are considered as inputs to many project management
processes, specifically for most planning processes. These factors may enhance or constrain
project management options. In addition, these factors may have a positive or negative influence
on the outcome.
EEFs vary widely in type or nature. These factors need to be considered if the project is to be
effective. EEFs include but are not limited to the factors described in Sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2.
2.1.1 EEFS INTERNAL TO THE ORGANIZATION
The following are examples of EEFs that are internal to the organization:
▶ Organizational culture, structure, and governance. Examples include vision, mission,
values, beliefs, cultural norms, leadership style, hierarchy and authority relationships,
organizational style, ethics, code of conduct, policies, and procedures.
▶ Geographic distribution of facilities and resources. Examples include factory locations
and virtual teams.
▶ Infrastructure. Examples include existing facilities, equipment, organizational telecom-
munications channels, information technology hardware, availability, and capacity.
▶ Information technology software. Examples include scheduling software tools,
configuration management systems, web interfaces to other online automated systems,
and work authorization systems.
▶ Resource availability. Examples include contracting and purchasing constraints,
approved providers and subcontractors, and collaboration agreements.
▶ Employee capability. Examples include existing human resources expertise, skills,
competencies, and specialized knowledge.
2.1.2 EEFS EXTERNAL TO THE ORGANIZATION
The following are examples of EEFs that are external to the organization:
▶ Marketplace conditions. Examples include competitors, market share brand recognition,
and trademarks.
▶ Social and cultural influences and issues. Examples include political climate, codes of
conduct, ethics, and perceptions.
▶ Legal restrictions. Examples include country or local laws and regulations related to security,
data protection, business conduct, employment, and procurement.
▶ Commercial databases. Examples include benchmarking results, standardized cost
estimating data, industry risk study information, and risk databases.
▶ Academic research. Examples include industry studies, publications, and benchmarking
results.
▶ Government or industry standards. Examples include regulatory agency regulations and
standards related to products, production, environment, quality, and workmanship.
▶ Financial considerations. Examples include currency exchange rates, interest rates,
inflation rates, tariffs, and geographic location.
▶ Physical environmental elements. Examples include working conditions, weather,
and constraints.
2.2 ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESS ASSETS
Organizational process assets (OPAs) are the plans, processes, documents, templates, and
knowledge repositories specific to and used by the performing organization. These assets influence
the management of the project.
OPAs include any artifact, practice, or knowledge from any or all of the performing organizations
involved in the project, which can be used to execute or govern the project. The OPAs also include the
organization’s lessons learned from previous projects and historical information. OPAs may include
completed schedules, risk data, and earned value data. OPAs are inputs to many project management
processes. Since OPAs are internal to the organization, the project team members may be able to
update and add to the organizational process assets as necessary throughout the project. They may
be grouped into two categories:
▶ Plans, processes, and documents. Generally, these assets are not updated as part of
the project work and are usually established by the project management office (PMO) or
another function outside of the project. These assets can be updated only by following
the appropriate organizational policies. Some organizations encourage the team to tailor
templates, life cycles, and checklists for the project. In these cases, the project team
should tailor those assets according to the needs of the project.
▶ Organizational knowledge repositories. These assets are updated throughout the project
with project information. For example, information on financial performance, lessons learned,
performance metrics and issues, and defects are continually updated throughout the project.
2.2.1 PLANS, PROCESSES, AND DOCUMENTS
The organization’s plans, processes, and documents for conducting project work include but
are not limited to:
▶ Initiating and Planning:
▹
Guidelines and criteria for tailoring the organization’s set of standard processes and
procedures to satisfy the specific needs of the project;
▹
Product and project life cycles, and methods and procedures (e.g., project management
methods, estimation metrics, process audits, improvement targets, checklists, and
standardized process definitions for use in the organization);
▹
Templates (e.g., project management plans, project documents, project registers,
report formats, contract templates, risk categories, risk statement templates,
probability and impact definitions, probability and impact matrices, and stakeholder
register templates); and
▹
Preapproved supplier lists and various types of contractual agreements (e.g., fixed-price,
cost-reimbursable, and time and materials [T&M] contracts).
▶ Executing, Monitoring, and Controlling:
▹
Change control procedures, including the steps by which performing organization
standards, plans, or any project documents will be modified and how any changes will
be approved and validated;
▹
Traceability matrices;
▹
Issue and defect management processes (e.g., defining issue and defect controls,
identifying and resolving issues and defects, and tracking action items);
▹
Resource availability control and assignment management;
▹
Organizational communication requirements (e.g., specific communication
technology available, authorized communication media, record retention policies,
videoconferencing, collaborative tools, and security requirements);
▹
Processes for prioritizing, approving, and issuing work authorizations;
▹
Templates (e.g., risk register, issue log, and change log);
▹
Standardized guidelines, work instructions, proposal evaluation criteria, and
performance measurement criteria; and
▹
Product, service, or result verification and validation processes.
▶ Closing. Project closure guidelines or requirements (e.g., final project audits, project
evaluations, deliverable acceptance, contract closure, resource reassignment knowledge
transfer to production and/or operations, and lessons learned).
2.2.2 ORGANIZATIONAL KNOWLEDGE REPOSITORIES
The organizational knowledge repositories for storing and retrieving information include but
are not limited to:
▶ Configuration management knowledge repositories containing the versions of software
and hardware components and baselines of all performing organization standards, policies,
procedures, and any project documents;
▶ Financial data repositories containing information such as labor hours, incurred costs,
budgets, and any project cost overruns;
▶ Historical information and lessons learned knowledge repositories (e.g., project records
and documents, all project closure information and documentation, information regarding
both the results of previous project selection decisions and previous project performance
information, and information from risk activities);
▶ Issue and defect management data repositories containing issue and defect status, control
information, issue and defect resolution, and action item results;
▶ Data repositories for metrics used to collect and make available measurement data on
processes and products; and
▶ Project files from previous projects (e.g., scope, cost, schedule, and performance measure-
ment baselines, project calendars, project schedule network diagrams, risk registers, risk
reports, and stakeholder registers).
2.3 GOVERNANCE
Projects operate within the constraints imposed by the organization through their structure
and governance framework. There are various types of governance including organizational
governance; organizational project management (OPM) governance; and portfolio, program, and
project governance.
2.3.1 ORGANIZATIONAL GOVERNANCE
Organizational governance is a structured way to provide direction and control through
policies and procedures to meet strategic and operational goals. Organizational governance is
typically conducted by a board of directors to ensure accountability, fairness, and transparency to
its stakeholders. Organizational governance principles, decisions, and procedures may influence
and impact the governance of portfolios, programs, and projects in the following ways:
▶ Enforces legal, regulatory, standards, and compliance requirements;
▶ Defines ethical, social, and environmental responsibilities; and
▶ Specifies operational, legal, and risk policies.
2.3.2 PROJECT GOVERNANCE
Project governance is the framework, functions, and procedures that guide project management
activities in order to create a unique product, service, or result to meet organizational, strategic, and
operational goals. Governance at the project level includes:
▶ Guiding and overseeing the management of project work;
▶ Ensuring adherence to policies, standards, and guidelines;
▶ Establishing governance roles, responsibilities, and authorities;
▶ Decision making regarding risk escalations, changes, and resources (e.g., team, financial,
physical, facilities);
▶ Ensuring appropriate stakeholder engagement; and
▶ Monitoring performance.
A project governance framework provides project stakeholders with structure, procedures, roles,
responsibilities, accountabilities, and decision-making models for managing the project. Elements
of a project governance framework include but are not limited to principles or procedures for:
▶ Stage gate or phase reviews;
▶ Identifying, escalating, and resolving risks and issues;
▶ Defining roles, responsibilities, and authorities;
▶ Process for project knowledge management and capturing lessons learned;
▶ Decision making, problem solving, and escalating topics that are beyond the project
manager’s authority; and
▶ Reviewing and approving changes to the project, and product changes that are beyond
the authority of the project manager.
2.4 MANAGEMENT ELEMENTS
Management elements are the components that comprise the key functions or principles of
general management in the organization. The general management elements are allocated within the
organization according to its governance framework and the organizational structure type selected.
The key functions or principles of management include but are not limited to:
▶ Division of work using specialized skills and availability to perform work;
▶ Authority given to perform work;
▶ Responsibility to perform work appropriately assigned based on such attributes as skill
and experience;
▶ Discipline of action (e.g., respect for authority, people, and rules);
▶ Unity of command (e.g., only one person gives orders for any action or activity to an individual);
▶ Unity of direction (e.g., one plan and one head for a group of activities with the same objective);
▶ General goals of the organization take precedence over individual goals;
▶ Paid fairly for work performed;
▶ Optimal use of resources;
▶ Clear communication channels;
▶ Right materials to the right person for the right job at the right time;
▶ Fair and equal treatment of people in the workplace;
▶ Clear security of work positions;
▶ Safety of people in the workplace;
▶ Open contribution to planning and execution by each person; and
▶ Optimal morale.
Performance of these management elements are assigned to selected individuals within the
organization. These individuals may perform the noted functions within various organizational
structures. For example, in a hierarchical structure, there are horizontal and vertical levels within the
organization. These hierarchical levels range from the line management level through to the executive
management level. The responsibility, accountability, and authority assigned to the hierarchical level
indicate how the individual may perform the noted function within that organizational structure.
2.5 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURES
Determination of the appropriate organizational structure type is a result of the study of trade-
offs between two key variables. The variables are the organizational structure types available for
use and how to optimize them for a given organization. There is not a one-size-fits-all structure for
any given organization. The final structure for a given organization is unique due to the numerous
variables to be considered.
2.5.1 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE TYPES
Organizational structures take many forms or types. Table 2-1 compares several types of
organizational structures and their influence on projects.
Table 2-1. Influences of Organizational Structures on Projects
Project Characteristics
Organizational Work Groups Project Project Resource Who Manages Project
Structure Type Arranged by: Manager’s Manager’s Availability the Projec t Management
Authority Role Budget? Administrative
Staff
Organic or Simple Flexible; people Little or none Part-time; may or Little or none Owner or operator Little or none
working side by may not be a
side designated job role
like coordinator
Functional Job being done Little or none Part-time; may or Little or none Functional manager Part-time
(centralized) (e.g., engineering, may not be a
manufacturing) designated job role
like coordinator
Multidivisional On e of: product; Little or none Part-time; may or Little or none Functional manager Part-time
(may replicate pro duction may not be a
functions for each pro cesses; designated job role
division with little po rtfolio; program; like coordinator
centralization) geographic region;
customer type
Matrix – strong By job function, Moderate to high Full-time Moderate to high Project manager Full-time
with project designated job role
manager as a
function
Matrix – weak Job function Low Part-time; done as Low Functional manager Part-time
part of another job
and not a
designated job role
like coordinator
Matrix – balanced Job function Low to moderate Part-time; Low to moderate Mixed Part-time
embedded in the
functions as a skill
and may not be a
designated job role
like coordinator
Project-oriented Project High to almost total Full-time High to almost total Project manager Full-time
(composite, designated job role
hybrid)
Virtual Network structure Low to moderate Full-time or Low to moderate Mixed Could be full-time
with nodes at part-time or part-time
points of contact
with other people
Hybrid Mix of other types Mixed Mixed Mixed Mixed Mixed
PMO* Mix of other types High to almost total Full-time High to almost total Project manager Full-time
designated job role
*PMO refers to a portfolio, program, or project management office or organization.
2.5.2 FACTORS IN ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE SELECTION
Each organization considers numerous factors for establishing its organizational structure. Each
factor may carry a different level of importance in the final analysis. The combination of the factor, its
value, and relative importance provides the organization’s decision makers with the right information
for inclusion in the analysis.
Factors to consider in selecting an organizational structure include but are not limited to:
▶ Degree of alignment with organizational objectives;
▶ Efficiency of performance;
▶ Specialization capabilities;
▶ Span of control, efficiency, and effectiveness;
▶ Clear path for escalation of decisions;
▶ Clear line and scope of authority;
▶ Delegation capabilities;
▶ Accountability assignment;
▶ Responsibility assignment;
▶ Adaptability of design;
▶ Simplicity of design;
▶ Cost considerations;
▶ Physical locations (e.g., colocated, regional, and virtual); and
▶ Clear communication (e.g., policies, status of work, and organization’s vision).
2.6 PROJECT MANAGEMENT OFFICE
A project management office (PMO) is an organizational structure that standardizes the project-
related governance processes and facilitates the sharing of resources, methodologies, tools, and
techniques. The responsibilities of a PMO can range from providing project management support
functions to the direct management of one or more projects.
Types of PMOs
There are several types of PMOs in organizations. Each type varies in the degree of control and
influence it has on projects within the organization, such as:
▶ Supportive. Supportive PMOs provide a consultative role to projects by supplying templates,
best practices, training, access to information, and lessons learned from other projects. This
type of PMO serves as a project repository. The degree of control provided by the PMO is low.
▶ Controlling. Controlling PMOs provide support and require compliance through various
means. The degree of control provided by the PMO is moderate. Compliance may involve:
▹
Adoption of project management frameworks or methodologies;
▹
Use of specific templates, forms, and tools; and
▹
Conformance to governance frameworks.
▶ Directive. Directive PMOs take control of the projects by directly managing the projects.
Project managers are assigned by and report to the PMO. The degree of control provided by
the PMO is high.
The project management office may have an organization-wide responsibility. It may play a role
in supporting strategic alignment and delivering organizational value. The PMO integrates data and
information from organizational strategic projects and evaluates how higher-level strategic objectives
are being fulfilled. The PMO is the natural liaison between the organization’s portfolios, programs,
projects, and the organizational measurement systems (e.g., balanced scorecard).
The projects supported or administered by the PMO may not be related other than by being
managed together. The specific form, function, and structure of a PMO are dependent upon the needs
of the organization that it supports.
A PMO may have the authority to act as an integral stakeholder and a key decision maker
Types of PMOs throughout the life of each project in order to keep it aligned with the business objectives. The
There are several types of PMOs in organizations. Each type varies in the degree of control and PMO may:
influence it has on projects within the organization, such as: ▶ Make recommendations,
▶ Supportive. Supportive PMOs provide a consultative role to projects by supplying templates, ▶ Lead knowledge transfer,
best practices, training, access to information, and lessons learned from other projects. This
▶ Terminate projects, and
type of PMO serves as a project repository. The degree of control provided by the PMO is low.
▶ Take other actions, as required.
▶ Controlling. Controlling PMOs provide support and require compliance through various
means. The degree of control provided by the PMO is moderate. Compliance may involve:
A primary function of a PMO is to support project managers in a variety of ways, which may
▹
Adoption of project management frameworks or methodologies; include but are not limited to:
▹
Use of specific templates, forms, and tools; and ▶ Managing shared resources across all projects administered by the PMO;
▹
Conformance to governance frameworks. ▶ Identifying and developing project management methodology, best practices, and standards;
▶ Directive. Directive PMOs take control of the projects by directly managing the projects. ▶ Coaching, mentoring, training, and oversight;
Project managers are assigned by and report to the PMO. The degree of control provided by
▶ Monitoring compliance with project management standards, policies, procedures, and
the PMO is high.
templates by means of project audits;
▶ Developing and managing project policies, procedures, templates, and other shared
documentation (organizational process assets); and
▶ Coordinating communication across projects.