8 Apply the Law of Three
Do what you can, with what you have, where you are.
THEODORE ROOSEVELT
Three core tasks that you perform contain most of the value that you contribute
to your business or organization. Your ability to accurately identify these three
key tasks and then to focus on them most of the time is essential for you to
perform at your best. Let me tell you a true story.
Three months after her first full-day coaching session with me in San Diego,
Cynthia told the group a story: “When I came here ninety days ago, you claimed
that you would show me how to double my income and my time off within
twelve months. This sounded completely unrealistic, but I was willing to give it
a try.
“On the first day, you asked me to write down a list of everything that I did
over the course of a week or a month. I came up with seventeen tasks that I was
responsible for. My problem was that I was completely overwhelmed with work.
I was working ten to twelve hours per day, six days per week, and not spending
enough time with my husband and my two young children. But I didn’t see any
way out.
“I had been working for eight years for a fast-growing entrepreneurial
company in the high-tech area, but there always seemed to be an overwhelming
amount of work to do and never enough time.”
One Thing All Day Long
She continued with her story. “Once I had made this list, you told me to ask this
question: ‘If you could do only one thing on this list all day long, which one task
would contribute the greatest value to your company?’ Once I had identified that
task, which was quite easy, I put a circle around that number.
“You then asked, ‘If you could do only one more thing on your list of key

tasks, which would be the second activity that contributes the most value to your
company?’
“Once I had identified the second most important task, you asked me the
same question with regard to the third most important task.
“You then said something that shocked me at the time. You said that fully 90
percent of the value that you contribute to your company is contained in those
three tasks, whatever they are. Everything else you do is either a support task or
a complementary task that could probably be delegated, downsized, outsourced,
or eliminated.”
Take Immediate Action
Cynthia continued with her story. “As I looked at the three tasks, I realized that
these were the three things I did that contributed the most value to my company.
This was on a Friday. On Monday morning at ten o’clock, I met with my boss
and explained what I had discovered. I said that I needed his help in delegating
and outsourcing all my work except those three key tasks. I felt that if I could
work on those three tasks exclusively, all day long, I could more than double my
contribution to the company. Then I told him that if I doubled my contribution, I
would like to be paid twice as much.”
She said, “My boss was completely silent. He looked at my list of key tasks,
looked back up at me, and looked at the list again.
“He then said, ‘You’re right. These are the three most important things that
you do in this company—and the three things that you do best. I will help you
delegate and outsource all these other minor tasks to free you up to work full-
time on these three key tasks. And if you double your contribution, I will pay
you twice as much.’”
Transform Your Life
Cynthia concluded her story by saying, “He did; then I did; then he did. He
helped me delegate and assign my minor tasks so I could concentrate on my top
three jobs. As a result, I doubled my output over the next thirty days, and he
doubled my income.
“I had been working very hard for more than eight years, and I doubled my
income in just one month by focusing all my time and energy on my three key
tasks. Not only that, but instead of working ten-and twelve-hour days, I work
from eight o’clock to five o’clock and spend time in the evenings and on the

weekends with my husband and my children. Focusing on my key tasks has
transformed my life.”
Perhaps the most important word in the world of work is contribution. Your
rewards, both financial and emotional, will always be in direct proportion to
your results, to the value of your contribution. If you want to increase your
rewards, you must focus on increasing the value of what you do. You must
dedicate yourself to contributing more results to your company. And three key
tasks always contribute the most.
The Quick List Method
Here is an exercise that we use with our coaching clients very early in the
process. We give them a sheet of paper and then tell them, “In thirty seconds,
write down your three most important goals in life right now.”
We have found that when people have only thirty seconds to write their three
most important goals, their answers are as accurate as if they had thirty minutes
or three hours. Their subconscious minds seem to go into hyperdrive, and their
three most important goals pop out of their heads and onto the paper, often to the
surprise of the people doing the exercise.
In 80 percent or more of cases, people have three goals in common: first, a
financial and career goal; second, a family or personal relationship goal; and
third, a health or fitness goal. And this is as it should be. These are the three
most important areas of life. If you give yourself a grade on a scale of one to ten
in each of these three areas, you can immediately identify where you are doing
well in life and where you need some improvement. Try it yourself and see. Give
this exercise to your spouse or your children. The answers can be quite
revealing.
Later in our coaching program, we expand this exercise by asking the
following questions:
1. What are your three most important business or career goals right now?
2. What are your three most important family or relationship goals right now?
3. What are your three most important financial goals right now?
4. What are your three most important health goals right now?
5. What are your three most important personal and professional development
goals right now?
6. What are your three most important social and community goals right now?

7. What are your three biggest problems or concerns in life right now?
When you force yourself to ask and answer each of these questions in thirty
seconds or less, you will be amazed at the answers. Whatever your answers, they
will usually be an accurate snapshot of your true situation in life at the moment.
These answers will tell you what is really important to you.
While you are setting goals and priorities, getting organized, concentrating
single-mindedly on one task at a time, and disciplining yourself to complete your
most important tasks, you must never forget that your ultimate goal is to live a
long, happy, and healthy life.
Time Management Is a Means to an End
The main reason to develop time management skills is so that you can complete
everything that is really important in your work and free up more and more time
to do the things in your personal life that give you the greatest happiness and
satisfaction.
Fully 85 percent of your happiness in life will come from happy relationships
with other people, especially those closest to you, as well as the members of
your family. The critical determinant of the quality of your relationships is the
amount of time that you spend face-to-face with the people you love and who
love you in return.
The purpose of time management—of eating that frog—and getting more
done in less time is to enable you to spend more “face time” with the people you
care about, doing the things that give you the greatest amount of joy in life.
Rule: It is the quality of time at work that counts and the quantity of time at
home that matters.
Work All the Time You Work
To keep your life in balance, you should resolve to work all the time you work.
When you go to work, put your head down and work the whole time. Start a
little earlier, stay a little later, and work a little harder. Don’t waste time. Every
minute that you spend in idle chitchat with coworkers is time taken away from
the work that you must accomplish if you want to do well at your job.
Even worse, time that you waste at work often has to be taken away from
your family. You have to either stay late or take work home and work in the
evenings. By not working effectively and efficiently during your workday, you

evenings. By not working effectively and efficiently during your workday, you
create unnecessary stress and deprive the members of your family of the very
best person you can possibly be.
Balance Is Not Optional
One of the most famous sayings of the ancient Greeks is “Moderation in all
things.” You need balance between your work and your personal life. You need
to set priorities at work and concentrate on your most valuable tasks. At the
same time, you must never lose sight of the fact that the reason for working
efficiently is so that you can enjoy a higher quality of life at home with your
family.
Sometimes people come up to me and ask, “How do I achieve balance
between my work and my home life?”
I ask them in return, “How often does a tightrope walker balance when on the
high wire?” After a few seconds of thinking, they almost always say, “All the
time.” I say, “That is the same situation with balance between work and home
life. You have to do it all the time. You never reach a point where you have
attained it perfectly. You have to work at it.”
Your goal should be to perform at your very best at work—to get the very
most done and enjoy the very highest level of rewards possible for you in your
career. Simultaneously, you must always remember to “smell the flowers along
the way.” Never lose sight of the real reasons why you work as hard as you do
and why you are so determined to accomplish the very most with the time that
you invest. The more time you spend face-to-face with the people you love, the
happier you will be.
EAT THAT FROG!

1. Determine the three most important tasks that you do in your work. Ask
yourself, “If I could do only one thing all day long, which one task would
contribute the greatest value to my career?” Do this exercise two more
times. Once you have identified your “big three,” concentrate on them
single-mindedly all day long.
2. Identify your three most important goals in each area of your life.
Organize them by priority. Make plans for their accomplishment, and work
on your plans every single day. You will be amazed at what you achieve in
the months and years ahead.