SECTION ONE
The Mind-Set
CHAPTER 1
Becoming a Member of the Club
Relationships are all there is. Everything in the universe only
exists because it is in relationship to everything else. Nothing
exists in isolation. We have to stop pretending we are individuals
that can go it alone.
—MARGARET WHEATLEY
How on earth did I get in here?" I kept asking myself in those
early days as an overwhelmed first-year student at Harvard
Business School.
There wasn't a single accounting or finance class in my back
ground. Looking around me, I saw ruthlessly focused young men
and women who had undergraduate degrees in business. They'd
gone on to crunch numbers or analyze spreadsheets in the finest
firms on Wall Street. Most were from wealthy families and had
pedigrees and legacies and Roman numerals in their names. Sure,
I was intimidated.
How was a guy like me from a working-class family, with a lib
eral arts degree and a couple years at a traditional manufacturing
company, going to compete with purebreds from McKinsey and
Goldman Sachs who, from my perspective, seemed as if they'd
been computing business data in their cribs?
It was a defining moment in my career, and in my life.
I was a country boy from southwestern Pennsylvania, raised
in a small, hardworking steel and coal town outside of Latrobe
called Youngstown. Our region was so rural you couldn't see
another house from the porch of our modest home. My father
worked in the local steel mill; on weekends he'd do construction.
My mother cleaned the homes of the doctors and lawyers in a
nearby town. My brother escaped small-town life by way of the
army; my sister got married in high school and moved out when I
was a toddler.
At HBS, all the insecurities of my youth came rushing back.
You see, although we didn't have much money, my dad and mom
were set on giving me the kind of opportunities my brother and
sister (from my mom's previous marriage) never got. My parents
pushed me and sacrificed everything to get me the kind of educa
tion that only the well-to-do kids in our town could afford. The
memories rushed back to those days when my mother would
pick me up in our beat-up blue Nova at the bus stop of the private
elementary school I attended, while the other children ducked
into limos and BMWs. I was teased mercilessly about our car and
my polyester clothes and fake Docksiders—reminded daily of my
station in life.
The experience was a godsend in many ways, toughening my
resolve and fueling my drive to succeed. It made clear to me there
was a hard line between the haves and the have-nots. It made me
angry to be poor. I felt excluded from what I saw as the old boys'
network. On the other hand, all those feelings pushed me to work
harder than everyone around me.
Hard work, I reassured myself, was one of the ways I'd beaten
the odds and gotten into Harvard Business School. But there was
something else that separated me from the rest of my class and
gave me an advantage. I seemed to have learned something long
before I arrived in Cambridge that it seemed many of my peers
had not.
As a kid, I caddied at the local country club for the homeown
ers and their children living in the wealthy town next to mine. It
made me think often and hard about those who succeed and those
who don't. I made an observation in those days that would alter
the way I viewed the world.
During those long stretches on the links, as I carried their bags,
I watched how the people who had reached professional heights
unknown to my father and mother helped each other. They found
one another jobs, they invested time and money in one another's
ideas, and they made sure their kids got help getting into the best
schools, got the right internships, and ultimately got the best jobs.
Before my eyes, I saw proof that success breeds success and,
indeed, the rich do get richer. Their web of friends and associates
was the most potent club the people I caddied for had in their
bags. Poverty, I realized, wasn't only a lack of financial resources; it
was isolation from the kind of people that could help you make
more of yourself.
I came to believe that in some very specific ways life, like golf,
is a game, and that the people who know the rules, and know them
well, play it best and succeed. And the rule in life that has unprece
dented power is that the individual who knows the right people,
for the right reasons, and utilizes the power of these relationships,
can become a member of the "club," whether he started out as a
caddie or not.
This realization came with some empowering implications. To
achieve your goals in life, I realized, it matters less how smart you
are, how much innate talent you're born with, or even, most eye-
opening to me, where you came from and how much you started
out with. Sure all these are important, but they mean little if you
don't understand one thing: You can't get there alone. In fact, you
can't get very far at all.
Fortunately, I was hungry to make something of myself (and,
frankly, even more terrified that I'd amount to nothing). Other
wise, perhaps I would have just stood by and watched like my
friends in the caddy yard.
I first began to learn about the incredible power of relation-
ships from Mrs. Poland. Carol Poland was married to the owner
of the big lumberyard in our town, and her son, Brett, who was
my age, was my friend. They went to our church. At the time, I
probably wanted to be Brett (great athlete, rich, all the girls falling
over him).
At the club, I was Mrs. Poland's caddie. I was the only one who
cared enough, ironically, to hide her cigarettes. I busted my
behind to help her win every tournament. I'd walk the course the
morning before to see where the tough pin placements were. I'd
test the speed of the greens. Mrs. Poland started racking up wins
left and right. Every ladies day, I did such a great job that she
would brag about me to her friends. Soon, others requested me.
I'd caddie thirty-six holes a day if I could get the work, and I
made sure I treated the club caddie-master as if he were a king. My
first year, I won the annual caddie award, which gave me the
chance to caddie for Arnold Palmer when he came to play on his
hometown course. Arnie started out as a caddie himself at the
Latrobe Country Club and went on to own the club as an adult. I
looked up to him as a role model. He was living proof that success
in golf, and in life, had nothing to do with class. It was about
access (yes, and talent, at least in his case). Some gained access
through birth or money. Some were fantastic at what they did, like
Arnold Palmer. My edge, I knew, was my initiative and drive.
Arnie was inspirational proof that your past need not be prologue
to your future.
For years I was a de facto member of the Poland family, split
ting holidays with them and hanging out at their house nearly
every day. Brett and I were inseparable, and I loved his family like
my own. Mrs. Poland made sure I got to know everyone in the
club that could help me, and if she saw me slacking, I'd hear it
from her. I helped her on the golf course, and she, in appreciation
of my efforts and the care I bestowed upon her, helped me in life.
She provided me with a simple but profound lesson about the
power of generosity. When you help others, they often help you.
Reciprocity is the gussied-up word people use later in life to
describe this ageless principle. I just knew the word as "care." We
cared for each other, so we went out of our way to do nice things.
Because of those days, and specifically that lesson, I came to
realize that first semester at business school that Harvard's hyper-
competitive, individualistic students had it all wrong. Success in
any field, but especially in business, is about working with people,
not against them. No tabulation of dollars and cents can account
for one immutable fact: Business is a human enterprise, driven
and determined by people.
It wasn't too far into my second semester before I started jok
ingly reassuring myself, "How on earth did all these other people
get in here?"
What many of my fellow students lacked, I discovered, were
the skills and strategies that are associated with fostering and
building relationships. In America, and especially in business,
we're brought up to cherish John Wayne individualism. People
who consciously court others to become involved in their lives are
seen as schmoozers, brown-nosers, smarmy sycophants.
Over the years, I learned that the outrageous number of mis-
perceptions clouding those who are active relationship-builders is
equaled only by the misperceptions of how relationship-building
is done properly. What I saw on the golf course—friends helping
friends and families helping families they cared about—had noth
ing to do with manipulation or quid pro quo. Rarely was there any
running tally of who did what for whom, or strategies concocted
in which you give just so you could get.
Over time, I came to see reaching out to people as a way to
make a difference in people's lives as well as a way to explore and
learn and enrich my own; it became the conscious construction of
my life's path. Once I saw my networking efforts in this light, I
gave myself permission to practice it with abandon in every part
of my professional and personal life. I didn't think of it as cold and
impersonal, the way I thought of "networking." I was, instead, con
necting—sharing my knowledge and resources, time and energy,
friends and associates, and empathy and compassion in a contin
ual effort to provide value to others, while coincidentally increas
ing my own. Like business itself, being a connector is not about
managing transactions, but about managing relationships.
People who instinctively establish a strong network of rela
tionships have always created great businesses. If you strip busi
ness down to its basics, it's still about people selling things to other
people. That idea can get lost in the tremendous hubbub the busi
ness world perpetually stirs up around everything from brands
and technology to design and price considerations in an endless
search for the ultimate competitive advantage. But ask any accom
plished CEO or entrepreneur or professional how they achieved
their success, and I guarantee you'll hear very little business jar
gon. What you will mostly hear about are the people who helped
pave their way, if they are being honest and not too caught up in
their own success.
After two decades of successfully applying the power of rela
tionships in my own life and career, I've come to believe that con
necting is one of the most important business—and life—skill
sets you'll ever learn. Why? Because, flat out, people do business
with people they know and like. Careers—in every imaginable
field—work the same way. Even our overall well-being and sense
of happiness, as a library's worth of research has shown, is dic
tated in large part by the support and guidance and love we get
from the community we build for ourselves.
It took me a while to figure out exactly how to go about con
necting with others. But I knew for certain that whether I wanted
to become president of the United States or the president of a local
PTA, there were a lot of other people whose help I would need
along the way.
Self-Help: A Misnomer
How do you turn an aspiring contact into a friend? How can
you get other people to become emotionally invested in your
advancement? Why are there some lucky schmos who always leave
business conferences with months' worth of lunch dates and a
dozen potential new associates, while others leave with only indi
gestion? Where are the places you go to meet the kind of people
who could most impact your life?
From my earliest days growing up in Latrobe, I found myself
absorbing wisdom and advice from every source imaginable—
friends, books, neighbors, teachers, family. My thirst to reach out
was almost unquenchable. But in business, I found nothing came
close to the impact of mentors. At every stage in my career, I
sought out the most successful people around me and asked for
their help and guidance.
I first learned the value of mentors from a local lawyer named
George Love. He and the town's stockbroker, Walt Saling, took me
under their wings. I was riveted by their stories of professional life
and their nuggets of street-smart wisdom. My ambitions were
sown in the fertile soil of George and Walt's rambling business
escapades, and ever since, I've been on the lookout for others who
could teach or inspire me. Later in life, as I rubbed shoulders with
business leaders, store owners, politicians, and movers and shak
ers of all stripes, I started to gain a sense of how our country's
most successful people reach out to others, and how they invite
those people's help in accomplishing their goals.
I learned that real networking was about finding ways to make
other people more successful. It was about working hard to give more
than you get. And I came to believe that there was a litany of tough-
minded principles that made this softhearted philosophy possible.
These principles would ultimately help me achieve things I
didn't think I was capable of. They would lead me to opportunities
otherwise hidden to a person of my upbringing, and they'd come
to my aid when I failed, as we all do on occasion. That aid was
never in more dire need than during my first job out of business
school at Deloitte & Touche Consulting.
By conventional standards, I was an awful entry-level consult
ant. Put me in front of a spreadsheet and my eyes glaze over, which
is what happened when I found myself on my first project, hud
dled in a cramped windowless room in the middle of suburbia,
files stretching from floor to ceiling, poring over a sea of data with
a few other first-year consultants. I tried; I really did. But I just
couldn't. I was convinced boredom that bad was lethal.
I was clearly well on my way to getting fired or quitting.
Luckily, I had already applied some of the very rules of net
working that I was still in the process of learning. In my spare time,
when I wasn't painfully attempting to analyze some data-ridden
worksheet, I reached out to ex-classmates, professors, old bosses,
and anyone who might stand to benefit from a relationship with
Deloitte. I spent my weekends giving speeches at small conferences
around the country on a variety of subjects I had learned at Har
vard mostly under the tutelage of Len Schlessinger (to whom I owe
my speaking style today). All this in an attempt to drum up both
business and buzz for my new company. I had mentors throughout
the organization, including the CEO, Pat Loconto.
Still, my first annual review was devastating. I received low
marks for not doing what I was asked to do with the gusto
and focus that was expected of me. But my supervisors, with
whom I had already developed relationships and who were aware
of all my extracurricular activities, had another idea. Together, we
cooked up a job description that previously did not exist at the
company.
My mentors gave me a $150,000 expense account to do what I
had already been doing: developing business, representing the
firm with speaking engagements, and reaching out to the press
and business world in ways that would strengthen Deloitte's pres
ence in the marketplace. My supervisors' belief in me paid off.
Within a year, the company's brand recognition in the line of
business on which I focused (reengineering) moved from bottom
of the consulting pack to one of the top of the industry, achieving
a growth rate the company had never known (though, of course,
it wasn't all my doing). I went on to become the company's chief
marketing officer and the youngest person ever tapped for part
ner. And I was having a blast—the work was fun, exciting, inter
esting. Everything you could want in a job.
While my career was in full throttle, in some ways it all seemed
like a lucky accident. In fact, for many years, I couldn't see exactly
where my professional trajectory would take me—after Deloitte, a
crazy quilt of top-level jobs culminating in my founding my own
company. It's only today, looking in the rearview mirror, that it
makes enormous sense.
From Deloitte, I became the youngest chief marketing officer
in the Fortune 500 at Starwood Hotel & Resorts. Then I went on
to become CEO of a Knowledge Universe (Michael Milken)-
funded video game company, and now, founder of my own com
pany, Ferrazzi Greenlight, a sales and marketing consulting and
training firm to scores of the most prestigious brands, and an
advisor to CEOs across the world. I zigged and zagged my way to
the top. Every time I contemplated a move or needed advice, I
turned to the circle of friends I had created around me.
At first I tried to draw attention away from my people skills for
fear that they were somehow inferior to other more "respectable"
business abilities. But as I got older, everyone from well-known
CEOs and politicians to college kids and my own employees came
to me asking for advice on how to do those things I had always
loved doing. Crain's magazine listed me as one of the forty top
business leaders under forty, and the World Economic Forum
labeled me as a "Global Leader of Tomorrow." Senator Hillary
Clinton asked me to use my connecting skills to raise money for
her favorite nonprofit organization, Save America's Treasures.
Friends and CEOs of Fortune 500 companies asked if I could help
them throw more intimate dinner parties for their lead prospects
and clients in key regions of the country. MBA students sent me
e-mails hungry to learn the people skills their business schools
weren't teaching them. Those turned into formal training courses
now taught at the most prestigious MBA programs in America.
The underlying "softer" skills I used to arrive at my success, I
learned, were something others could benefit from learning.
Of course, building a web of relationships isn't the only thing
you need to be successful. But building a career, and a life, with the
help and support of friends and family and associates has some
incredible virtues.
1. It's never boring. Time-consuming, sometimes; demanding,
perhaps. But dull, never. You're always learning about yourself,
other people, business, and the world, and it feels great.
2. A relationship-driven career is good for the companies you
work for because everyone benefits from your own growth—
it's the value you bring that makes people want to connect with
you. You feel satisfaction when both your peers and your
organization share in your advancement.
3. Connecting—with the support, flexibility, and opportunities
for self-development that come along with it—happens to
make a great deal of sense in our new work world. The loyalty
and security once offered by organizations can be provided by
our own networks. Lifetime corporate employment is dead;
we're all free agents now, managing our own careers across
multiple jobs and companies. And because today's primary
currency is information, a wide-reaching network is one of the
surest ways to become and remain thought leaders of our
respective fields.
Today, I have over 5,000 people on my Palm who will answer
the phone when I call. They are there to offer expertise, jobs, help,
encouragement, support, and yes, even care and love. The very
successful people I know are, as a group, not especially talented,
educated, or charming. But they all have a circle of trustworthy,
talented, and inspirational people whom they can call upon.
All of this takes work. It involves a lot of sweat equity, just as it
did for me back in the caddie yard. It means you have to think
hard not only about yourself but about other people. Once you're
committed to reaching out to others and asking for their help at
being the best at whatever you do, you'll realize, as I have, what a
powerful way of accomplishing your goals this can be. Just as
important, it will lead to a much fuller, richer life, surrounded by
an ever-growing, vibrant network of people you care for and who
care for you.
This book outlines the secrets behind the success of so many
accomplished people; they are secrets that are rarely recognized
by business schools, career counselors, or therapists. By incorpo
rating the ideas I discuss in this book, you too can become the
center of a circle of relationships, one that will help you succeed
throughout life. Of course, I'm a bit of a fanatic in my efforts to
connect with others. I do the things I'm going to teach you with a
certain degree of, well, exuberance. But by simply reaching out to
others and recognizing that no one does it alone, I believe you'll
see astounding results, quickly.
Everyone has the capacity to be a connector. After all, if a
country kid from Pennsylvania can make it into the "club," so
can you.
See you there.