Closing Process Group
The process in the Closing Process Group is shown in Table 8-1.
Table 8-1. Closing Process Group Process
Closing Processes
8.1 Close Project or Phase
The Closing Process Group consists of the process(es) performed to formally complete or close
a project, phase, or contract. This Process Group verifies that the defined processes are completed
within all Process Groups to close the project or phase, as appropriate, and formally establishes
that the project or project phase is complete. The key benefit of this Process Group is that phases,
projects, and contracts are closed out appropriately. While there is only one process in this Process
Group, organizations may have their own processes associated with project, phase, or contract
closure. Therefore, the term Process Group is maintained.
This Process Group may also address the early closure of the project, for example, aborted
projects or canceled projects.
8.1 CLOSE PROJECT OR PHASE
Close Project or Phase is the process of finalizing all activities for the project, phase, or contract.
The key benefits of this process are the project or phase information is archived, the planned work
is completed, and organizational team resources are released to pursue new endeavors.
This process is performed once or at predefined points in the project. The inputs, tools and
techniques, and outputs are shown in Figure 8-1. Figure 8-2 presents the data flow diagram for
the process.
Close Project or Phase
Inputs Tools & Techniques Outputs
1. Project charter 1. Expert judgment 1. Project documents updates
2. Project management plan 2. Data analysis • Lessons learned register
• All components • Document analysis 2. Final product, service, or
3. Project documents • Regression analysis result transition
• Assumption log • Trend analysis 3. Final report
• Basis of estimates • Variance analysis 4. Organizational process assets
• Change log 3. Meetings updates
• Issue log
• Lessons learned register
• Milestone list
• Project communications
• Quality control
measurements
• Quality reports
• Requirements
documentation
• Risk register
• Risk report
4. Accepted deliverables
5. Business documents
• Business case
• Benefits management plan
6. Agreements
7. Procurement documentation
8. Organizational process assets
Note: This figure provides the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs that may be used
for this process. Descriptions for inputs and outputs appear in Section 9. Descriptions for
tools and techniques appear in Section 10.
Figure 8-1. Close Project or Phase: Inputs, Tools & Techniques, and Outputs
4.1
Develop
Project Charter
• Project Charter
Project
Management
Plan
Project management plan Customer
• All components • Final product, service, or
result transition
Project
Documents
Project
8.1
Project documents Close Project documents updates Documents
• Assumption log Project or • Lessons learned register
• Basis of estimates
• Change log Phase
• Issue log
• Lessons learned register
• Milestone list
• Project communications
• Quality control measurements
• Quality reports
• Requirements documentation Enterprise/
• Risk register Organization
• Risk report • Final report
• Organizational process
assets updates
7.3
Validate
Scope
• Accepted deliverables
5.23
6.9
Plan Project Enterprise/
Conduct
Procurement Documents Organization
Procurements
Management
• Procurement documentation • Agreements • Business case • Organizational process assets
• Benefits management plan
Note: This figure provides the inputs and outputs that may be used for this process.
Descriptions for inputs and outputs appear in Section 9.
Figure 8-2. Close Project or Phase: Data Flow Diagram
When closing a project, the project manager reviews the project management plan to ensure
that all project work is completed and that the project has met its objectives. The activities necessary
for the administrative closure of the project or phase include, but are not limited to:
▶ Actions and activities necessary to satisfy completion or exit criteria for the phase or
project, such as:
▹
Make certain that all documents and deliverables are up to date and that all issues
are resolved.
▹
Confirm the delivery and formal acceptance of deliverables by the customer.
▹
Ensure that all costs are charged to the project.
▹
Close project accounts.
▹
Reassign personnel.
▹
Deal with the excess project material.
▹
Reallocate project facilities, equipment, and other resources.
▹
Elaborate the final project reports as required by organizational policies.
▶ Activities related to the completion of the contractual agreements applicable to the project
or project phase, such as:
▹
Confirm the formal acceptance of the seller’s work.
▹
Finalize open claims.
▹
Update records to reflect final results.
▹
Archive such information for future use.
▶ Activities needed to:
▹
Collect project or phase records.
▹
Audit project success or failure.
▹
Manage knowledge sharing and transfer.
▹
Identify lessons learned.
▹
Archive project information for future use by the organization.
▶ Actions and activities necessary to transfer the project’s products, services, or results to
the next phase or to production and/or operations.
▶ Collection of suggestions for improving or updating the policies and procedures of the
organization and sending them to the appropriate organizational unit.
▶ Actions and activities to measure stakeholder satisfaction.
The Close Project or Phase process also establishes the procedures to investigate and document
the reasons for actions taken when a project is terminated before completion. To successfully achieve
this, the project manager needs to engage all of the proper stakeholders in the process.