10 Take It One Oil Barrel at a Time
Persons with comparatively moderate powers will accomplish
much, if they apply themselves wholly and indefatigably to one
thing at a time.
SAMUEL SMILES
There is an old saying that “by the yard it’s hard; but inch by inch, anything’s a
cinch!”
One of the best ways to overcome procrastination is for you to get your mind
off the huge task in front of you and focus on a single action that you can take.
One of the best ways to eat a large frog is for you to take it one bite at a time.
Lao-tzu wrote, “A journey of a thousand leagues begins with a single step.”
This is a great strategy for overcoming procrastination and getting more things
done faster.
Crossing a Great Desert
Many years ago, driving an old Land Rover, I crossed the heart of the Sahara
Desert, the Tanezrouft, deep in modern-day Algeria. By that time, the desert had
been abandoned by the French for years, and the original refueling stations were
empty and shuttered.
The desert was 500 miles across in a single stretch, without water, food, a
blade of grass, or even a fly. It was totally flat, like a broad, yellow sand parking
lot that stretched to the horizon in all directions.
More than 1,300 people had perished in the crossing of that stretch of the
Sahara in previous years. Often, drifting sands had obliterated the track across
the desert, and the travelers had gotten lost in the night, never to be found again
alive.
To counter the lack of features in the terrain, the French had marked the track
with black, fifty-five-gallon oil drums every five kilometers, which was exactly
with black, fifty-five-gallon oil drums every five kilometers, which was exactly
the distance to the horizon, formed by the curvature of the earth.
Because of this, in the daytime, we could always see two oil barrels—the one
we had just passed and the one five kilometers ahead of it. And that was exactly
what we needed to stay on course.
All we had to do was to steer for the next oil barrel. As a result, we were able
to cross the biggest desert in the world by simply taking it “one oil barrel at a
time.”
Take It One Step at a Time
In the same way, you can accomplish the biggest task in your life by disciplining
yourself to take it just one step at a time. Your job is to go as far as you can see.
You will then be able to see far enough to go further.
To accomplish a great task, you must step out in faith and have complete
confidence that your next step will soon become clear to you. Remember this
wonderful advice: “Leap—and the net will appear!”
A great life or a great career is built by performing one task at a time, quickly
and well, and then going on to the next task. Financial independence is achieved
by saving a little money every single month, year after year. Health and fitness
are accomplished by just eating a little less and exercising a little more, day after
day and month after month.
You can overcome procrastination and accomplish extraordinary things by
taking just the first step, getting started toward your goal, and then taking it one
step, one oil barrel, at a time.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Select any goal, task, or project in your life on which you have been
procrastinating and make a list of all the steps you will need to take to
eventually complete the task.
2. Then take just one step immediately. Sometimes all you need to do to get
started is to sit down and complete one item on the list. And then do one
more, and so on. You will be amazed at what you eventually accomplish.