CHAPTER 9
Warming the Cold Call
Cold calls turn even the most competent of souls into neu
rotic messes. I can relate to those who go catatonic at the
very idea of calling a stranger.
So how do you manage a cold call?
First, it's all about attitude. Your attitude. You're never going
to be completely ready to meet new people; there is no perfect
moment. Your fears will never be completely quieted, because
inviting rejection is never going to be appealing. There are always a
hundred reasons to procrastinate. The trick is to just plunge right
in. Remember, if you don't believe you are going to get what you
want from the call, you probably won't. So, in the words of Caddy
Shack, "Be the ball." You have to envision yourself winning to win.
You have to view getting to know new people as a challenge
and an opportunity. The very idea should spark your competitive
fires, silencing the wallflower in all of us that shies away from
socially adventuresome behavior.
And second, cold calls are for suckers. I don't call cold—ever.
I've created strategies that ensure every call I make is a warm
one.
Let me give you an example. Jeff Arnold, founder of WebMD,
is a friend. He had recently bought out the rights and patents for a
technology that puts digital content on a miniature DVD disk for
a unique delivery. One use for this technology is placing these
small disks on the lids of fountain beverages. Picture getting a
soda from McDonald's; on the top of your drink is a small diskette
containing games, music, and/or videos. With 20 billion or so
fountain beverages sold each year, this is a compelling new form
to get digital content into American hands.
In talking with Jeff and his partner, Thomas lull, I was told
about the deal they had just closed with a movie theater company
to distribute their DVDs on beverages sold at theaters. Jeff and
Thomas thought that, given the demographics of moviegoers, a
company like Sony Electronics could stand to benefit from this
new distribution technology. But they didn't know whom to con
tact at Sony and came to me for thoughts.
I had met Sir Howard Stringer, CEO of Sony, a number of
times, so I put a call into his office. But instead of just waiting for
Howard to get back to me, I wanted to find a few other paths as
well. At the time, I couldn't think of anyone else within my net
work of contacts who could hook me up with the right decision
maker within Sony. When no one responded to my phone calls or
e-mails, I researched which agencies serviced Sony, and I found
that Brand Buzz, a marketing agency within advertising giant
Young & Rubicam, counted Sony as one of its top clients.
Furthermore, the person who was CEO of Brand Buzz at the
time, John Partilla, is a close friend of mine.
So I called him. "Hey, John, I've got two things for you. One,
I want you to meet a buddy of mine named Jeff Arnold. He's
brilliant and creative and you should know him. He's the guy
who founded WebMD and he's started a new company, Convex
Group, which may need your services down the line. And two,
Convex is putting out this incredible technology that distributes
digital content in a new way. I think Sony would appreciate being
aware of it."
In a sense, by reaching out in this way, I was offering John two
opportunities: a chance to know someone of importance and
interest, perhaps for new business, through Jeff, and a chance to
look good with the business he already had—Sony—by bringing
them new opportunities.
John was happy to make the connection. He knew the perfect
guy, the new head of Media & Internet Strategies at Sony, Serge
Del Grosso. I asked John to send a brief introductory e-mail ahead
of my call and CC me in the process. By having him copy me on
the e-mail, in all subsequent correspondence to Serge, I could
include John, and put some urgency behind our meeting. Tacitly,
as a result, both John and I were now waiting for a meeting with
Serge.
As with so many business dealings, that alone didn't do the
deed. Serge was busy, and I heard nothing back from him or his
administrative assistant after several e-mails. This isn't unusual.
Frequently, people won't get back to you. You have to put your ego
aside and persist in calling or writing. And when you do finally
connect, don't sabotage your efforts by expressing how annoyed
you are that they didn't get back to you as quickly as you would
have liked. Nor should you apologize for your persistence. Just
dive in as if you caught him on the first call. Make it comfortable
for everyone.
Setting up such meetings takes time. It is up to you to take the
initiative. Sometimes, you have to be aggressive. After a few weeks
of no reply, I called Sony information and eventually got Serge's
direct line. When I call someone directly whom I haven't spoken
with before, I try to call at an unusual time. Someone who is busy
is more likely to pick up their own phone at 8:00 A.M. or 6:30 P.M.
Plus, they're probably less stressed out since they're not facing
typical nine-to-five pressures.
I called in the early morning, but got Serge's voice mail. So
I left a message: "I just want to reiterate my excitement regarding
our meeting. I've never heard John talk so flatteringly of a
business associate. I understand how busy you must be. I haven't
heard from your administrative assistant, but I'm sure I will.
See you soon." At no point do you want your interactions to
become strained. Creating and maintaining a sense of optimism
and gentle pressure around the appointment is all part of the
dance.
When I still didn't hear from his office, I called Serge's direct
line after hours, around 6 P.M. This time, Serge picked up the
phone himself and I gave him the pitch.
"Hi, Serge. It's Keith Ferrazzi. John's talked highly of you for
some time, and I've finally got a nice excuse to give you a call.
I'm calling for my friend Jeff Arnold, the founder of WebMD, who
has a new, very powerful way to distribute digital content. With
some of the new products you'll be launching this quarter, it could
make for the perfect partnership. I'll be in New York next week.
Let's get together. Or, if getting together this trip isn't convenient,
I'll make room in my schedule for whenever it's more convenient
for you."
In fifteen seconds, I used my four rules for what I call warm
calling: 1) Convey credibility by mentioning a familiar person
or institution—in this case, John, Jeff, and WebMD. 2) State your
value proposition: Jeff's new product would help Serge sell his
new products. 3) Impart urgency and convenience by being pre
pared to do whatever it takes whenever it takes to meet the other
person on his or her own terms. 4) Be prepared to offer a compro
mise that secures a definite follow-up at a minimum.
The result? I was in Serge's office the next week. And, while his
budgets didn't allow a short-term application, he totally under
stood the power of the medium for his audience. Don't be sur
prised if sometime soon your movie-theater beverage has a cool
little DVD on the lid brimming over with some of Sony's newest
technology.
Here are some of the rules I follow fleshed out in more detail:
1. Draft off a reference.
The reason a cold call feels like torture was set out in vivid detail
fifty or so years ago in an advertisement, recalled by Harvey
Macka, in his book Swim with the Sharks. It pictures a corporate
killjoy facing the reader, who is cast in the role of the salesman.
The killjoy says:
I don't know who you are.
I don't know your company.
I don't know what your company stands for.
I don't know your company's customers.
I don't know you company's products.
I don't know your company's reputation.
Now—what was it you wanted to sell me?
You can see the total lack of credibility one has when making a
cold call. Credibility is the first thing you want to establish in any
interaction, and ultimately, no one will buy from you unless you
establish trust. Having a mutual friend or even acquaintance will
immediately make you stand out from the other anonymous indi
viduals vying for a piece of someone's time.
What do I mean by that? If you are calling on behalf of the
president, I guarantee you Mr. Killjoy on the other end of the line
will listen to what you have to say. Drafting off the brands of
others, whether personal references or organizations, is a helpful
tactic to get past someone's initial reluctance.
Most of us, however, don't work for Microsoft or know the
president of the organization we're trying to reach out to. Our
task, then, is to tap our network of friends, family, clients, neigh
bors, classmates, associates, and church members to find a path
back to the person we're trying to reach. When you mention
someone both of you have in common, all of a sudden the person
you're calling has an obligation not only to you but also to the
friend or associate you just mentioned.
Today, finding a line into someone's office is a lot easier than
when I started out.
Again, the wonderfully effective search engine Google.com is
nearly invaluable in this process. Do a name search and you'll
likely find where a person went to school, what his or her interests
are, and what boards he or she sits on—you'll get a perspective on
the person's life that should give you ideas on where a mutual con
tact might be found. What sports do they play? What nonprofits
do they care about? Do you know other people involved in similar
causes?
A whole host of new companies, like Spoke and Linkedln, spe
cialize in helping you find connections to people you want to get
in touch with. A company called Capital IQ aggregates market
data and information on executives, for example, to make it very
easy to find out whom they know that you know. Other compa
nies, like Friendster, Ryze, and ZeroDegrees, help to broker con
nections inside and outside of companies around the world. Some
of these networks are better for finding a date, so you'll have to see
for yourself which one makes more sense for you.
People used to say there were only six degrees of separation
between anyone in the world. Today, we're only one or two mouse
clicks away.
2. State your value.
Acquiring a reference or institution to draft off of is only a start
ing point. It will help you get your foot in the door. Once you have
someone's commitment to hear you out for thirty seconds, you'll
need to be prepared to deliver a high-value proposition. You've
got very little time to articulate why that person should not try to
get off the phone as quickly as possible. Remember, it's all about
them. What can you do for them?
When researching for a connection to the people you want to
meet, first do some reconnaissance about the company and indus
try they're selling in. Selling is, reduced to its essence, solving
another person's problems. And you can only do that when you
know what those problems are. When I finally got a chance to talk
with Serge, for instance, I already knew he was preparing to
launch some new products in the upcoming quarter, and in the
busy holiday season he was going to need something that would
really stand out. I also knew his target audience aligned well with
those going to the theaters.
I can cut through the clutter of other cold calls by personaliz
ing my call with specific information that shows I'm interested
enough in their success to have done some homework.
3. Talk a little, say a lot. Make it quick, convenient,
and definitive.
You want to impart both a sense of urgency and a sense of conve
nience. Instead of closing with "We should get together some time
soon," I like to finalize with something like "I'm going to be in town
next week. How about lunch on Tuesday? I know this is going to be
important for both of us, so I'll make time no matter what."
You will, of course, need to provide enough information about
your value proposition to make the person want to spend some
time talking. But also, don't talk too much. If you launch into a
long sales pitch without finding out the other person's thoughts,
you can turn them off immediately. It is a dialogue, not a scripted
monologue. Even my fifteen-second intro above left time for the
casual "ah huh, yes" or "hmm" from the other person. Don't ever
talk at someone. Give them time to come along with you.
Remember, in most instances, the sole objective of the cold
call is, ultimately, to get an appointment where you can discuss the
proposition in more detail, not to close the sale. In my experience,
deals, like friendships, are made only one-to-one, face-to-face.
Take as little time as possible in your cold call to ensure that the
next time you speak to them it's in their office, or better yet, over
some linguine and wine.
4. Offer a compromise.
In any informal negotiation, you go big at the outset, leaving room
for compromise and the ability to ratchet down for an easier close.
I closed my pitch to Serge by suggesting that even if he didn't want
to hear anything about digital content, I'd love to get together
with him just to meet, given our mutual friend's admiration and
respect.
Robert B. Cialdini's book The Psychology of Persuasion shows
how compromise is a powerful force in human relations. An
example used to illustrate this idea concerns Boy Scouts, who are
often turned down initially when trying to sell raffle tickets. It has
been statistically shown, however, that when the Scout then offers
candy bars instead, a less costly item, customers will buy the candy
even if they don't really want it. In giving in to the concession,
people feel as if they're holding up their social obligation to oth
ers. So remember, try for a lot—it will help you settle for what it is
you really need.