CHAPTER 1 0
Managing the Gatekeeper
Artfully
Let's face it, having a list of names of people you want to reach
in business, and a plan for what to say to them when you've
got them on the phone, doesn't mean much if you never get them
on the phone. Half the difficulty in reaching out to others is actu
ally reaching somebody at all. It's even more difficult when that
somebody is a Big Kahuna with a thicket of protective voice mail
boxes, blind e-mail addresses, and defensive assistants running
interference.
So how do you open the door?
First, make the gatekeeper an ally rather than an adversary.
And never, ever get on his or her bad side. Many executive assis
tants are their bosses' minority partners. Don't think of them
as "secretaries" or as "assistants." In fact, they are associates and
lifelines.
Every time I have ever tried to go head-to-head with an
administrative assistant, I've lost. It's like that childhood game:
rock, paper, scissors. Well, in this game, as Mary Abdo taught me,
the "associate" trumps all.
Mary was the assistant to Pat Loconto, the CEO of Deloitte
(and I guess still is, even though Pat is retired), and in the begin
ning, we got along great. I remember once finishing up a dinner
with Pat and Mary. Mary had to leave early, so I walked her out
side while she got a taxi. The next day, I called to say thanks for
arranging such a wonderful evening.
Apparently, people rarely called Mary to thank her for organ
izing events, and she was very grateful. She even bragged the next
morning to Pat about how much she liked me.
Mary was a blast: fun and full of energy and wonderful stories.
In my early days at Deloitte, when I'd call Pat, I'd spend an extra
few minutes kibitzing. "Mary, you're a hoot to talk to." Looking
back, my relationship with Mary was clearly one of the most
important reasons I was given such easy access to Pat. And my
relationship with Pat was one of the most important relationships
of my business life.
However, with Mary and me there was a time when all that
began to change. I had just become chief marketing officer.
At that time, I got my very own full-time administrative assis
tant, who I'll call Jennifer. I thought Jennifer was everything I'd
want in an assistant: smart, organized, efficient. We got along great.
The only problem was she didn't get along with Mary—at all.
Mary managed all the administrative assistants in our execu
tive suite. Almost immediately, Jennifer and Mary were butting
heads. Jennifer was digging in her heels and not letting up. I just
thought they'd work it out eventually.
"It's all a power play. She's wasting my time," Jennifer com
plained.
I wanted to be supportive. Jennifer's complaints and concerns
seemed reasonable to me, but I was hearing only one side of the
story. I encouraged Jennifer to work harder at the relationship.
And one day, after I had been pulled into the middle of another
bout between them, I asked Mary if she could just work harder to
get along with Jennifer.
Mary didn't take my suggestion well. Before long, getting on
Pat's calendar became more and more difficult. Bypassing corpo
rate bureaucracy, which was a breeze in the past, now became
impossible. My expense accounts were getting micro-scrutinized,
taking up my time, and the pressure on Jennifer was greater than
ever, which made her react even worse.
I'd had enough. I went up to Pat's office and said bluntly, "Look,
Mary, this has to stop."
If I thought Mary had been upset before—yikes!—it was noth
ing compared to her ire now.
Office life became a nightmare for a period of time.
Finally, Pat drew me aside. "Keith," he said, "you've gone about
this all wrong. Now this whole ordeal is making my life difficult.
Think about it: I get to hear all this from Mary's side as well about
your administrative assistant, and I don't really want to have to
deal with this. Second of all, you're being stupid. Mary likes you
and always has. Do yourself a favor. Do me a favor. Whatever it
takes, smooth things over with Mary. When it comes to these
issues, she runs this place."
Personally, I had always cared for and respected Mary, but now
I learned something else—an assistant like Mary has enormous
power. Secretaries and assistants are more than just helpful associ
ates to their bosses. If they are any good, they become trusted
friends, advocates, and integral parts of their professional, and
even personal, lives.
One day Jennifer, who was as loyal to me as Mary was to Pat,
came to me and offered to resign. "Listen, I'm miserable and your
career is going to be jeopardized if all this doesn't get straightened
out," she told me. It was an amazingly gracious gesture, as well as
a way to restore sanity in her life. I promised to help find Jennifer
another job (which she did quickly), and we remain good friends
to this day.
When I went to hire my next assistant, I did two things. First, I
asked if Mary would prescreen all candidates and rank her top
choices. I went with her first choice. I also told my new administra
tive assistant to do whatever Mary instructed. It didn't take long for
me to make up with Mary, either. Pat was right: Mary did like me
and I just had to better understand her role. Pat started getting my
messages again and all of our lives were so much easier.
As important as gatekeepers are within an organization, they're
that much more important when you're working from the
outside.
At about the same time, Kent Blossil, an advertising sales rep
resentative for Newsweek magazine, was one of twenty ad sales
people banging on my door looking to make a sale. But I had a
media buyer at the agency whom we paid to take those meetings
for me, and as a rule, I never met with ad sales reps.
Kent was different. He knew the kind of influence a gatekeeper
wields.
Kent would call Jennifer once a week. He was deferential and
overwhelmingly kind. Every so often, he would surprise her with
a box of chocolates or flowers or something. Still, despite my assis
tant's suggestions, I saw no reason to take the meeting.
Jennifer persisted, however, and Kent must've been scheduled
into my calendar on ten different occasions without my knowl
edge. Each time, I'd cancel. But she'd just keep plugging her good
friend into my schedule because she felt he was different and had
a more innovative approach than the others.
"Have him go meet with my buyer," I finally said one day.
"No, you're going to meet with him. You can take five minutes
out of your day. He's very nice and creative and worth five min
utes." So I relented.
Kent certainly was nice, but he also came to the meeting pre
pared with a deep understanding of my business and an interest
ing value proposition. At our meeting, almost the first thing out of
his mouth was "If it's okay with you, I would like to introduce you
to the top three senior editors of Newsweek. Would you be inter
ested in that?" As someone who relied on getting the media to
cover Deloitte's intellectual property, this was an important offer.
"Of course," I told him.
"By the way, we're having a conference in Palm Springs where
some other CMOs are getting together with our editors and
reporters. It's going to be a really good conference about media
strategies in the New Economy. Can I put you on the guest list?"
He was offering a real business value, as many of the other CMOs
would also be Deloitte customers. It would be a personal network
ing opportunity among my peers.
"Yeah, I'd like to go to that."
"Also, I know your media guy has been evaluating a proposal
we put in a few months ago. I'm not going to waste your time with
the details. I just want you to know that it would be great if we
could do business together sometime." That was it. That was Ken's
five-minute sales pitch. It was 98 percent value-add for me, 2 per
cent sales pitch by him.
I called our media guy after Ken left my office. "Go to
Newsweek," I told him. "Quote them a fair price relative to the
other magazines we were considering, and give them our business
in this segment. Make it work." And you know that when Ken
went to another magazine, so did my business.
My point? Always respect the gatekeeper's power. Treat them
with the dignity they deserve. If you do, doors will open for you to
even the most powerful decision makers. What does it mean to
treat them with dignity? Acknowledge their help. Thank them by
phone, flowers, a note.
And yes, there are times, of course, where the situation calls for
more than niceties and pleasant gifts. At times, you'll need to use
street smarts to get a meeting.
Last summer, I met a former Disney executive on a flight to
New York. In the course of our conversation, I mentioned that I
was a fairly new transplant to Los Angeles and I was always look
ing to meet good, smart people. She suggested that I might like to
get to know an up-and-coming executive by the name of Michael
Johnson, the president of Walt Disney International.
There wasn't anything obvious that Johnson could do for my
company or me at that point, but I felt he was someone I should
meet. I was running a computer games company, and who could
say whether Disney might someday be interested in the video
games space. The only problem was getting through Johnson's gate
keeper; at a huge company like Disney, that's often a big problem.
I called Michael Johnson when I got home from my travels
and, unsurprisingly, got a neutral to cold reception.
"I'm sorry, Mr. Johnson is traveling, and he'll be gone all
month," his administrative assistant told me.
"That's okay," I replied. "Why don't you tell him a friend of
Jane Pemberton's called. Please tell him to call me back when he
gets a chance."
With a first call you don't want to come off as aggressive.
Remember, you never, ever want to anger the gatekeeper.
My second call was more of the same: establishing my presence
and making it known I wouldn't go away.
"Hi, this is Keith Ferrazzi. I'm just calling back because I haven't
heard from Michael." Here, again, without being too pushy, you
begin to create the presumption that his return call is imminent
and expected. Johnson's gatekeeper politely took down my mes
sage and thanked me for calling. I asked for his e-mail address, but
she wouldn't give it to me, stating privacy concerns.
On the third attempt, she was less polite. "Listen," she told me
with a little edge in her voice, "Mr. Johnson is very busy and I
don't know who you are." Now, I could either match her tone and
this would spiral downward, or ...
"Oh, I'm really sorry, I'm a personal friend of a friend of his. I
just moved into the city, and Jane suggested that I should meet
Michael, and honestly, I don't even know why besides the fact that
Jane is a good friend of Michael's. Maybe you're right. Maybe it's
all wrong. Maybe Michael doesn't know Jane well and he wouldn't
want to meet me. I apologize if this is the case."
By being so candid and even vulnerable, I put the assistant on
alert. She now fears that perhaps she's been too gruff, perhaps
inappropriate, to a friend of a friend of her boss. After all, I'm just
a guy following a friend's advice. Most likely she'll back off, wor
ried that she's closed the gate too tight. Then I made a suggestion:
"Why don't I just send Michael an e-mail?" And at this point, she's
thinking, "I want to be out of the middle of this thing." So, finally,
I got his e-mail address.
The e-mail I sent was simple: "Dear Michael, I'm a friend of
Jane's, and she suggested I talk with you ... Jane thinks we should
know each other." If I had had something specific to discuss, I
would have put it right up front, but the best value proposition I
had was the mutual friend who felt this would be a win-win.
It's sometimes effective to utilize several forms of communica
tion when trying to reach an important new contact. An e-mail,
letter, fax, or postcard often has a better chance of landing directly
in the hands of the person you're trying to reach.
Johnson's reply was cordial and short. "When convenient, I'd
be happy to meet."
So I went back to his assistant with the information that
Michael said he'd be happy to meet and that I was now calling to
find out when. And finally, we did in fact meet.
Situations that call for this amount of maneuvering are, unfortu
nately, not rare. It's real work and it takes a finesse that only practice,
practice, practice can master. But once you recognize the importance
of gatekeepers, and turn them into allies with respect, humor, and
compassion, there will be few gates that aren't open to you.