7 Focus on Key Result Areas
When every physical and mental resource is focused, one’s power
to solve a problem multiplies tremendously.
NORMAN VINCENT PEALE
“Why am I on the payroll?” This is one of the most important questions you can
ever ask and answer, over and over again, throughout your career.
As it happens, most people are not sure exactly why they are on the payroll.
But if you are not crystal clear about why you are on the payroll and what results
you have been hired to accomplish, it is very hard for you to perform at your
best, get paid more, and get promoted faster.
In simple terms, you have been hired to get specific results. A wage or a
salary is a payment for a specific quality and quantity of work that can be
combined with the work of others to create a product or service that customers
are willing to pay for.
Your job can be broken down into about five to seven key result areas,
seldom more. These represent the results that you absolutely, positively have to
get to fulfill your responsibilities and make your maximum contribution to your
organization.
A key result area is defined as something for which you are completely
responsible. If you don’t do it, it doesn’t get done. A key result area is an activity
that is under your control. It produces an output that becomes an input or a
contributing factor to the work of others.
Key result areas are similar to the vital functions of the body, such as those
indicated by blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and brain-wave activity.
An absence of any one of these vital functions leads to the death of the organism.
By the same token, your failure to perform in a critical result area of your work
can lead to the end of your job as well.
The Big Seven in Management and Sales

The Big Seven in Management and Sales
The key result areas of management are planning, organizing, staffing,
delegating, supervising, measuring, and reporting. These are the areas in which a
manager must get results to be successful in his or her area of responsibility. A
weakness in any one of these areas can lead to underachievement and failure as a
manager.
The key result areas of sales are prospecting, building rapport and trust,
identifying needs, presenting persuasively, answering objections, closing the
sale, and getting resales and referrals. Poor performance in any one of these key
skills can lead to lower sales and sometimes the failure of a salesperson.
Whatever you do, you must have certain essential skills for you to do your job
in an excellent fashion. These demands are constantly changing. You have
already developed core competencies that make it possible for you to do your
job in the first place. But certain key results are central to your work and
determine your success or failure in your job. What are they?
Clarity Is Essential
The starting point of high performance is for you to identify the key result areas
of your work. Discuss them with your boss. Make a list of your most important
output responsibilities, and make sure that the people above you, on the same
level as you, and below you are in agreement with it.
For example, for a salesperson, getting qualified appointments is a key result
area. This activity is the key to the entire sales process. Closing a sale is also a
key result area. When the sale is made, it triggers the activities of many other
people to produce and deliver the product or service.
For a company owner or key executive, negotiating a bank loan may be a key
result area. Hiring the right people and delegating effectively are both key result
areas. For a receptionist or secretary, typing letters and answering the phone and
transferring callers quickly and efficiently are defined as key result areas.
People’s ability to perform these tasks quickly and efficiently largely determines
their pay and promotability.
Give Yourself a Grade
Once you have determined your key result areas, the second step is for you to
grade yourself on a scale of one to ten (with one being the lowest and ten being
the highest) in each of those areas. Where are you strong and where are you
weak? Where are you getting excellent results and where are you

weak? Where are you getting excellent results and where are you
underperforming?
Rule: Your weakest key result area sets the height at which you can use all your
other skills and abilities.
This rule says that although you could be exceptional in six out of your seven
key result areas, poor performance in the seventh area will hold you back and
determine how much you achieve with all your other skills. This weakness will
act as a drag on your effectiveness and be a constant source of friction and
frustration.
For example, delegating is a key result area for a manager. This skill is the
key leverage point that enables a manager to manage and to get results through
others. A manager who cannot delegate properly is held back from using all his
or her other skills at the maximum levels of effectiveness. Poor delegation skills
alone can lead to failure in the job.
Poor Performance Produces Procrastination
One of the major reasons for procrastination in the workplace is that people
avoid jobs and activities in those areas where they have performed poorly in the
past. Instead of setting a goal and making a plan to improve in a particular area,
most people avoid that area altogether, which just makes the situation worse.
The reverse of this is that the better you become in a particular skill area, the
more motivated you will be to perform that function, the less you will
procrastinate, and the more determined you will be to get the job finished.
The fact is that everybody has both strengths and weaknesses. Refuse to
rationalize, justify, or defend your areas of weakness. Instead, identify them
clearly. Set a goal and make a plan to become very good in each of those areas.
Just think! You may be only one critical skill away from top performance at your
job.
The Great Question
Here is one of the greatest questions you will ever ask and answer. “What one
skill, if I developed and did it in an excellent fashion, would have the greatest
positive impact on my career?”
You should use this question to guide your career for the rest of your life.
Look into yourself for the answer. You probably know what it is.

Look into yourself for the answer. You probably know what it is.
Ask your boss this question. Ask your coworkers. Ask your friends and your
family. Whatever the answer is, go to work to bring up your performance in this
area.
The good news is that all business skills are learnable. If anyone else is
excellent in that particular key result area, this is proof that you can become
excellent as well, if you decide to.
One of the fastest and best ways to stop procrastinating and get more things
done faster is for you to become absolutely excellent in your key result areas.
This can be as important as anything else you do in your life or your career.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Identify the key result areas of your work. What are they? Write down
the key results you have to get to do your job in an excellent fashion. Give
yourself a grade from one to ten on each one. And then determine the one
key skill that, if you did it in an excellent manner, would help you the most
in your work.
2. Take this list to your boss and discuss it with him or her. Invite honest
feedback and appraisal. You can only get better when you are open to the
constructive input of other people. Discuss your conclusions with your staff
and coworkers. Talk them over with your spouse.
Make a habit of doing this analysis regularly for the rest of your career.
Never stop improving. This decision alone can change your life.