CHAPTER 20
Pinging—All the Time
If 80 percent of success is, as Woody Allen once said, just show
ing up, then 80 percent of building and maintaining relation
ships is just staying in touch.
I call it "pinging." It's a quick, casual greeting, and it can
be done in any number of creative ways. Once you develop
your own style, you'll find it easier to stay in touch with more
people than you ever dreamed of in less time than you ever imag
ined.
Yes, there's grunt work involved. Pinging takes effort. That's
the tough part. You have to keep pinging and pinging and pinging
and never stop. You have to feed the fire of your network or it will
wither or die.
How many times have you asked yourself, "What's his face ...
Ya know, that guy ..." Or "I know her, I just can't remember her
name . . ." We all face that situation all too often, to my mind.
Every time I hear those statements uttered, I sense a network or
community of contacts withering.
These days we're overwhelmed with so much information that
our minds can prioritize only the most recent data. What does it
take to break through the white noise of information overload?
Becoming front and center in someone's mental Rolodex is con
tingent on one invaluable little concept: repetition.
• People you're contacting to create a new relationship need to
see or hear your name in at least three modes of commu
nication—by, say, an e-mail, a phone call, and a face-to-face
encounter—before there is substantive recognition.
• Once you have gained some early recognition, you need to
nurture a developing relationship with a phone call or e-mail
at least once a month.
• If you want to transform a contact into a friend, you need a
minimum of two face-to-face meetings out of the office.
• Maintaining a secondary relationship requires two to three
pings a year.
Using the above rules of thumb should give you an idea of
what it'll take to keep your own network humming. I make hun
dreds of phone calls a day. Most of them are simply quick hellos
that I leave on a friend's voice mail. I also send e-mail constantly.
Using a BlackBerry, I've found I can do the majority of my ping
ing while in trains, planes, and automobiles. I remember—or at
least my PDA remembers—personal events like birthdays and
anniversaries, and I make a special point of reaching out to people
during these times.
When it comes to relationship maintenance, you have to be on
your game 24/7, 365 days a year.
There's no doubt you have to bring a certain vigor to this part
of the system. But hey, this is just my way of doing things. You'll
figure out your own way. The governing principle here is repeti-
tion; find a way to ensure that you'll contact people regularly
without putting too much strain on your schedule.
One way I've found to make maintaining my network of
contacts, colleagues, and friends easier is to create a rating sys
tem for the network that corresponds to how often I reach out.
First, I divide my network into five general categories: Under
"Personal," I include my good friends and social acquaintances.
Because I'm generally in contact with these people organically,
I don't include them on a contact list. The relationship is estab
lished, and when we talk, it's as if we'd been in touch every day.
"Customers" and "Prospects" are self-explanatory. "Important
Business Associates" is reserved for people I'm actively involved
with professionally. I'm either doing business with them currently
or hoping to do business with them. This is the mission-critical
category. Under "Aspirational Contacts," I list people I'd like to
get to know, or I've met briefly (which is anyone from your boss's
boss to a worthy celebrity) and would like to establish a better
relationship with.
After reading the chapter on taking names, you've probably
already begun to segment and categorize your network in a way
that works for you—there is no standard method here. Create a
segmentation that works for you and your objectives. This is a
good habit and one that deserves repeating. All successful people
are planners. They think on paper. Failing to plan, as they say, is
planning to fail. And a plan is a list of activities and names.
The next step is to print out your master list of contacts that
contains all the people in your network under the categories
you've placed them in. The question now is How often do you
contact each person on the list? I use a pretty simple system, but
there's no reason you can't improve upon it. I'll go down my mas
ter list and add the numbers 1, 2, or 3 next to each name.
A "1" gets contacted at least each month. This means I'm
actively involved with the person, whether it's a friend or a new
business associate. With new relationships, a "1" generally means I
have yet to solidify the relationship with at least three different
forms of communication. Each time I reach out to a person, I like
to include a very short note next to their name telling me the last
time I contacted them and how. If last month I sent an e-mail say
ing hello to a potential customer rated "1," this month I'll give a
call. Also, contacts designated "1" I add to my cell phone's speed
dial. (How I love thee, speed dial, let me count the ways! It allows
me quick reference and an easy way to get in touch fast.) If I have
a free moment in a cab, I'll just go down the speed dial and make
several calls to keep in touch with people I've not spoken to
recently.
A "2" rating indicates my "touch base" people. These are either
casual acquaintances or people whom I already know well. They
get a quarterly call or e-mail. I try to include these people in mass
e-mails about my business. And like the rest of my network, they
get either an annual holiday card or birthday call.
Those people rated "3" are people I don't know well, who,
because of time and circumstance, I'm unable to devote any sig
nificant energy to pinging. These people are strictly acquain
tances, people I've met in passing, but who have found their way
into my address book. I hope to reach this group, in some way,
at least once a year. The surprising thing about this category is
that, because you don't know the person all that well when you
do reach out with a card or e-mail, the reaction is wonderful.
Most people are delighted, and their curiosity piqued, when
someone they don't know all that well sends them a note, however
short.
The third step, as I mentioned in the chapter on taking names,
is segmenting your network into call lists. In time, your master list
will become too unwieldy to work from directly. Your call lists will
save you time and keep your efforts focused. They can be organ
ized by your number ratings, by geography, by industry, and so
on. It's totally flexible. If I'm flying to New York, for example, I'll
print out a "New York list" and make a few calls to my "Is" when I
got off the plane. "Hi, Jan. Just landed in New York and it made me
think of you. No time to meet this trip, but I just wanted to touch
base." This New York list also proves very helpful a week in
advance of the trip in trying to fill in those extra slots of time I
may have in my schedule.
Where do I find the time? Again, you find time everywhere. I
ping in the cab, or in my car. I ping in the bathroom (BlackBerry
only). When I'm bored at a conference, I ping via e-mail. I've
developed the habit of saving every e-mail I send and receive. I
put each e-mail, when I receive it, in one of my categories, and
Outlook records whether I've returned the e-mail or not. Then I
just open up those files and respond, pinging away. I make a habit
of reviewing my master list at the end of the week and cross
checking it with the activities and travel plans I have for the fol
lowing week. In this way, I stay up-to-date and have my trusty lists
at my side all week long.
Another time-saver is to pay close attention when you place
your phone calls. There are times, amusingly enough, when I call in
order NOT to get through. Sometimes you don't have time for an
in-depth conversation; you just want to drop a line and say hello. I
try and take mental notes of people's phone habits if I want to sim
ply leave a message, I'll call when I know they're not around. Call
ing their office really early or late usually does the trick.
The important thing is that you build the concept of pinging
into your workflow. Some organizations go so far as to make ping
ing integral to their organizational processes. I'm told that the
consulting firm McKinsey and Company actually has a rule of
thumb that one hundred days after a new CEO takes charge of a
company, McKinsey assigns one of their consultants to call and
see how McKinsey might help. One hundred days is, McKinsey
figures, just enough time for the new CEO to feel that he or she
knows what the issues and problems are, but not enough time to
have gotten his or her arms around the solutions.
With pinging gaining credibility as an important business
practice, it shouldn't surprise you that some ingenious new soft
ware has been developed to make it easier. Plaxo is a neat new pro
gram, which I mentioned briefly in the chapter on technology,
that I've found really helpful. The software this company has
developed keeps people connected by solving the common but
frustrating problem of out-of-date contact information. The soft
ware goes into your database of contacts, pulls out everybody with
an e-mail address, sends the record that you have of them, and
asks them to update it. When they do so, it sends you back an
e-mail stating their new information. Automated pinging!
I do it every six months or so and have become a true devotee.
Not long ago, I did a Plaxo update. A few days later, I got an e-mail
from a former prospect I'd lost contact with who wrote, "We
talked a year ago. Nothing came of it. Now might be a better time
to talk." The e-mail turned into a two-million-dollar account.
The medium and message of a ping runs the gamut. There is
the "I just called to say I care" ping that I use for closer contacts.
Essentially, I want to convey the message, "Hey, it has been too
long since we've spoken and I wanted you to know that I miss you,
that you are important to me." And then there are the more pro
fessional versions of the above. But always try to make any mes
sage as personal as possible.
For people important to my career or business, I tend to favor
the value-add ping. Here I'm trying to provide something of value
in my communication, recognizing when someone I know gets a
promotion, or the company he or she runs has a good financial
quarter, or he or she has a child. I also like to send relevant articles,
short notes of advice, or other small tokens that convey that I am
thinking of them and am eager to help.
Get creative. I have one friend who carries a digital camera
wherever he goes. When he returns from a conference or work-
related travels, he pings the people he met with a quick hello and
a picture attached. It's a great idea that has worked very well for
him. I've got another friend who uses music in a similar manner.
When he meets someone new, he asks the person what kind of
music he or she enjoys. This guy has a growing digital music
library that's off the charts, and he's always on top of the latest
grooves. When he pings, he might write, "It was a pleasure meet
ing you the other day. You mentioned your love of jazz. It just so
happens that I have a rare recording of Miles Davis. I thought
you'd get a kick out of it. Let me know what you think."
Once you've cultivated a contact with a new associate or
friend, nurture it by pinging. It's the Miracle-Gro for your bloom
ing garden of friends and associates.
The Pinging Staple: Birthdays
Standard advice on acknowledging the events in people's lives sug
gests sending Christmas or Chanukah cards. The holidays, in my
opinion, are not the best time to focus your pinging energies. Why?
Because it's hard to differentiate yourself from the other 150 people
doing the same thing.
My personal favorite pinging occasion remains birthdays, the
neglected stepchild of life's celebrated moments. As you get
older, the people around you start forgetting your big day (mostly
because they think they want to forget their own). Mom might
not call a day late, but your brother or sister will. Your friends will
figure, "Why remind the poor guy he's getting up there in age?"
Before long, that residual disappointment turns into resentment, and
the resentment turns into apathy. Or at least the appearance of
apathy.
"Nah, birthdays aren't my thing," I hear people say all the time.
You persuasively tell your family, "Don't do anything big, but if you
do something, make it small."
Well, I don't believe it. I'm onto your game, friend. You care,
and so does everybody else.
We've been conditioned since childhood, despite our best
efforts to be "Birthday Scrooges" in adult life, that that day is all
about you. It is your day, and it has been since you were a kid. And
even when you're seventy years old, deep down inside, despite all
your protestations, a little recognition of that seventy-year-old life
feels good even if you don't get a big red wagon anymore.
Don't kid yourself—EVERYONE CARES ABOUT HIS OR HER
BIRTHDAY!
I was in New York some years back and up popped a reminder
on my Palm: "Birthday—Kent Blossil." Kent was the man who suc
cessfully got past my gatekeeper. When I met Kent that day, and I
received his contact information, I asked for his birth date, as I try
to do with everyone. It's not intrusive, and most people forget the
moment after they tell me.
Kent was a Mormon. Born in Salt Lake City, Utah, he had
upward of ten brothers and sisters. With such a large family, you'd
think the man's phone would be ringing off the hook on his
birthday.
I hadn't spoken to him for over a year. It was a busy day for me,
and I didn't see the reminder until close to 3:00 P.M. that afternoon.
Generally, I like to make birthday calls in the early morning. This
way I get someone's voice mail, and when they come in to work
that morning, they're greeted with my rendition of "Happy Birth
day." I can't tell you how many New York City cabdrivers must think
I'm an utter lunatic.
So when Kent actually picked up his phone that afternoon, my
personal Pavarotti of "Happy Birthday" greeted him. No greetings.
No niceties. I just let it rip.
Normally, I get laughter and a grateful "Thanks." This time, after
I had finished, the phone went silent. "Kent, you there? It's your
birthday, right?" Nothing. Not a word. I thought I'd made a jerk out
of myself and missed the day or something.
"Kent?"
Finally he stammers out, "Yeah." He was choked up, audibly
holding back tears.
"You all right?"
"You remembered my birthday?" he said. People are always
shocked by this.
"You know, Keith, this year none of my brothers or sisters or fam
ily .. . well, nobody remembered my birthday. Nobody remem
bered," he said. "Thank you so much."
He never forgot. People never do.