CHAPTER 1 9
Social Arbitrage
Some people become power brokers through sheer intimida
tion and force of will; others, generally with far better results,
learn to become indispensable to the people around them.
I still remember the advice that made me aware of these two
routes to power. Greg Seal pulled me into his office one day not
long after I had been hired at Deloitte, sat me down, and said,
"Stop driving yourself—and everyone else—crazy thinking about
how to make yourself successful. Start thinking about how you're
going to make everyone around you successful."
From the moment I had arrived at Deloitte, I was a man on a
mission. I wanted to work more hours, meet more partners, be on
the biggest projects solving the biggest problems—and I wanted
to do it all now, because I was desperate to make a name for
myself. In the wake of my ambition, a whole lot of people didn't
like me. And at Deloitte, as in all organizations, it isn't easy getting
things done when your peers dislike you.
That you'd anger and abuse some people on your way to the
top used to be accepted practice. Michael Korda's 1975 book on
the secrets to becoming a corporate chieftain, Power! How to Get
It, How to Use It, advised that "master players... attempt to chan
nel as much information as they can into their own hands, then
withhold it from as many people as possible." But if thirty years
ago power was attained through a monopoly of information (and
a whole lot of angry people), today the system is more akin to
social arbitrage: a constant and open exchange of favors and intel
ligence, as Greg had so wisely advised.
How does this work? Think of it as a game. When someone
mentions a problem, try to think of solutions. The solutions come
from my experience and knowledge, and my tool kit of friends and
associates. For example, if I'm in a conversation and the other per
son mentions they're looking to buy a house in Los Angeles, the first
thing I think is "How can my network help?" And there's no time to
linger. Mid-conversation, I'll pull out my cell phone and locate
someone who can help my companion buy a home. As I'm dialing,
I might say something like, "You need to meet this Realtor I know
named Betty. No one knows the Los Angeles area better. Here's her
phone number, but hold on—" Now Betty is on the line. "Hi, Betty,
it's so nice to hear your voice. It has been too long. Listen, I'm stand
ing here with a friend who is in need of your wisdom. I just gave
him your number and wanted to tell you personally he'd be calling."
The connection is made, the work is done, and whatever happens
next, both parties are pleased by my efforts on their behalf.
This is social arbitrage at work. And the first key is, don't wait
to be asked. Just do it.
Let me give you another example, an interaction I had with
Hank Bernbaum, the CEO of High Sierra, a small bag manufac
turer out of Chicago. Hank had seen a short profile on me and my
marketing expertise in the magazine Fast Company. He called me
out of the blue and said, "The article on you was excellent."
Already, he had my attention.
"We're a tiny company," he said, "and we're terrible at market
ing. We've got the best duffels and bags in America, but no one
knows it. Our revenue and market size is a quarter of what it
should be. Can you help?"
He added, "By the way, we don't have a lot of money to burn."
I usually love taking these calls when time allows, because I'm
able to play confidante, counselor, or even concierge, for so many
different people. I'm constantly introducing two people from dif
ferent parts of my life who might benefit from knowing each
other. It's a sort of ongoing puzzle, matching up the right people
and the right opportunities. Once you, too, start to see the world
this way, it opens up exciting opportunities. It's both rewarding
and fun. Hank needed some consulting help and his bags needed
exposure. I called Peter, a consultant who had worked with me at
Starwood Hotels, a terrific marketing guy and someone who loved
the outdoors. A perfect fit. Then I called another friend who is
head of marketing at Reebok. Their bags never sold as well as their
other products, and I thought the two might benefit from sharing
insights and experiences. I even "cloned" a meeting I had with a
marketing executive at Reebok, and brought Hank along to make
face-to-face introductions.
Then I asked Hank if he'd ever had any publicity. He hadn't. I
sent a couple of Hank's totes to Alan Webber, the editor of Fast
Company. A few months later, the magazine did a piece on High
Sierra products after Alan had his writers evaluate a particularly
innovative travel bag we had sent.
Hank was ecstatic. But then I added one more thing: "Hank,
the calls I'm making on your behalf, you need to be doing this for
yourself. Do you belong to the Executive Club in Chicago?"
"I've been thinking about it," he said. "Why?"
"You've got to stop thinking of yourself and your company as
an island. You need to meet people. There are a lot of CEOs and
smart people in the Executive Club who could've done what I'm
doing for you, only a few years ago. You need to be making these
connections."
Soon after, Hank started networking locally with other execu
tives. Hank's products are superb; what he needed was the net
work. However, it's not just he and I who have prospered. My
former colleague, Peter, the outdoorsy marketer from Starwood,
used the experience to build the confidence he needed to ulti
mately go out on his own. He now has a thriving consulting firm
in New York. The CMO at Reebok? He was grateful for an intro
duction that might help him boost his bag business. What started
with one man and a problem, ended with several people and
many solutions.
My point? Real power comes from being indispensable. Indis-
pensability comes from being a switchboard, parceling out as
much information, contacts, and goodwill to as many people—in
as many different worlds—as possible
It's a sort of career karma. How much you give to the people
you come into contact with determines how much you'll receive
in return. In other words, if you want to make friends and get
things done, you have to put yourself out to do things for other
people—things that require time, energy, and consideration.
Successfully connecting with others is never about simply get
ting what you want. It's about getting what you want and making
sure that people who are important to you get what they want
first. Often, that means fixing up people who would otherwise
never have an opportunity to meet.
The best sort of connecting occurs when you can bring
together two people from entirely different worlds. The strength
of your network derives as much from the diversity of your rela
tionships as it does from their quality or quantity.
Most of us know the people within our own professional and
social group, and little more. Through other connectors, and on
your own, I would urge you to make a point of knowing as many
people from as many different professions and social groups as
possible. The ability to bridge different worlds, and even different
people within the same profession, is a key attribute in managers
who are paid better and promoted faster, according to an influen
tial study conducted by Ron Burt, a professor at the University of
Chicago Graduate School of Business.
"People who have contacts in separate groups have a competi
tive advantage because we live in a system of bureaucracies, and
bureaucracies create walls," says Burt. "Individual managers with
entrepreneurial networks move information faster, are highly
mobile relative to bureaucracy, and create solutions better
adapted to the needs of the organization."
His research goes a long way toward answering that persis
tently nagging question: Is it what you know or who you know
that leads to success? For Burt, it's both. Who you know deter
mines how effectively you can apply what you know. Getting
things done, and climbing the walls of your company, require hav
ing the right relationships.
I've always been well aware of this idea. At Deloitte, I got to
know the CMOs of our largest competition. At Starwood, I
quickly became familiar with the industry influencers. When I
became CEO of YaYa, I set out to meet the leadership in the media
and computer games industry. What I didn't realize was that all
along I was setting the groundwork for the success of Ferrazzi-
Greenlight at the same time. No matter what the job, if I was going
to push my company's product into an important brand position
among those who mattered, I needed to be able to converse with
the players inside and outside the industry who could help me
make that happen. One of the ways I achieved this was by helping
them get to know one another—which they, too, knew was benefi
cial for their business. I was surprised, for instance, that the heads
of marketing for the big consulting firms didn't know one another.
Maybe you're thinking to yourself, "But I don't know any exec
utives or key people in my industry! And why would they want to
get to know me anyway?" Not a problem. Performing social arbi-
trage when your financial and relational resources are thin is actu
ally not too big a hurdle. The solution is knowledge, one of the
most valuable currencies in social arbitrage. Knowledge is free—it
can be found in books, in articles, on the Internet, pretty much
everywhere, and it's precious to everyone.
The ability to distribute knowledge in a network is a fairly easy
skill to learn. So easy, in fact, you should get started today. Identify
some of the leading thinkers and writers in your industry. Do
these figures have any new books on the market? Look at what's
hot on the nonfiction New York Times bestseller list. Or for busi
ness bestsellers, check out the Wall Street Journal's list in the Per
sonal Journal section on Friday. Buy the book, read it, and take
some notes summarizing the Big Idea, a few of its interesting stud
ies or anecdotes, and why it's relevant to the people you're think
ing about passing your knowledge on to. You've just created your
own Big Idea of the Month Cliffs Notes (or whatever snazzy title
you choose). Now pick a few people, some whom you know well
and some you don't, and e-mail them your work. All you have to
say is "Here are some cool ideas I think you'd like to be on top of."
Presto! You're now a knowledge broker. After you get the swing
of it, you might want to send out a monthly Big Idea Cliffs Notes
e-mail. Turn it into a newsletter. If one month you don't have the
time, you could forward some particularly helpful article you
read. Or, if the book is particularly interesting and you really want
to make an impression, send the book itself.
It's easy enough to make knowledge brokering a habit. Let's
say, for instance, someone mentions over lunch or in the minutes
before the start of a meeting that they are having a hard time deal
ing with their teenage son or daughter. You should hear "prob
lem." As a practitioner of social arbitrage, you think "need to find
a solution." If you don't have any personal advice, the solution will
come from asking yourself, "How can my network of friends and
contacts help? Which one of my friends has teenagers?" It proba-
bly won't take long before you come up with someone you know,
maybe your own parents, who handled their own teenage kids in
a constructive manner. Get on the phone and ask them if they
have any advice, or if they used any books or articles to help them
through the process. Now pass it on.
Or let's say you're a real estate agent but you aspire to be a
clothing designer. I don't know too much about clothes, but as
with just about any subject, I'm sure others do (one of those peo
ple has almost certainly written a book about it). Do a search on
Amazon.com, and find something that seems helpful to someone
looking to become a clothing designer. Then send the aspiring
clothing designer a link or even the book itself, or broker a direct
conversation—that would be real value.
Yes, this kind of reaching out takes time and a certain thoughtful-
ness. But that is exactly why it's so appreciated. Facilitating all those
connections, all that knowledge, and ultimately all that happiness
is what being a truly modern-day "power broker" is all about.
To paraphrase Dale Carnegie: You can be more successful in
two months by becoming really interested in other people's suc
cess than you can in two years trying to get other people interested
in your own success.
CONNECTORS' HALL OF FAME PROFILE
Vernon Jordan
"Make yourself indispensable to others."
Vernon Jordan, dealmaker extraordinaire, former Clinton advisor,
and Washington super-lawyer, currently sits on ten corporate
boards, including American Express, Dow Jones, Revlon, and
Xerox. He's the Senior Managing Director for Lazard, an interna-
tional investment bank, and also a high-ranked senior counsel at
the Washington, D.C., law firm of Akin Gump. Fortune ranked him
ninth on its list of the most powerful black executives.
According to Time magazine, Jordan earns a seven-figure
income from a "law practice that requires him to file no brief and
visit no courtroom, because his billable hours tend to be logged in
posh restaurants, on cellular phones . . . making a deft introduction
here, nudging a legislative position there, ironing out an indelicate
situation before it makes the papers." He doesn't just talk a good
game. He makes things happen.
It's hard enough, in this life, to hold down just one job in a high-
powered organization. But Jordan has made himself so valuable—so
coveted—to so many employers that he actually works for several at
once—and none of them seem to mind his vocational polygamy.
Along the way, Jordan has become one of Washington's most
networked individuals, a man who seems to have friends and influ
ence in every quarter and province. He's connected Lou Gerstner
with IBM. He approached Colin Powell about replacing Warren
Christopher as Secretary of State. He helped James Wolfensohn
become President of the World Bank.
How has he done it?
Jordan has used social arbitrage to make himself indispensa
ble—he is, in every sense of the word, a modern-day power broker.
But he wasn't always at the vortex of everything that happens in
Washington. He didn't even live full-time in Washington until Akin
Gump hired him in 1982. By the time he arrived there, he'd done
enough in his career—having built up several decades of contacts
made and favors done—to know that, before long, he'd become a
man of influence in his new town. Akin Gump knew it too, which is
one reason they hired him: "I knew he would fit into the Washing
ton legal community and come to be a dominant figure in it," said
Robert Strauss, a senior partner. "This is a town built on the use of
power and on relationships, and Vernon is about as good a people
person as I know."
Jordan became a household name to all Americans in the 1 990s
because of his relationship with Bill Clinton. But long before then,
Jordan was well known to the black community.
In the '60s, Jordan was an active civil rights lawyer in Atlanta.
Later, he became a field secretary for the NAACP, fighting for
school integration and registering black Georgians to vote. In
1 964, Jordan left the NAACP to head the Southern Regional Coun
cil's Voter Education Project (VEP). His role was to find volunteers
who could organize voter drives, and to raise money for the proj
ect. Raising money compelled Jordan to travel throughout the
South, pitching wealthy foundations on why they should grant
money to the VEP. It was this position that allowed Jordan to gain
respect as a man who could fight for the cause from within the
establishment. His Rolodex began to expand as he forged connec
tions with both the heads of foundations and the VEP supervisors in
Washington, D.C.
Jordan first ingratiated himself to the Fortune 500 community
when, in 1966, he was invited to President Johnson's White House
conference on civil rights, which was attended by hundreds of
CEOs. For the remainder of the '60s and '70s, he traveled as a
plugged-in member of both corporate and civil rights circles. His
involvement in one circle made him all the more valuable to the
other. Favors done and friends made in one circle could be lever
aged to do favors and make friends in the other.
Jordan's full-time jobs allowed him to keep one foot in each
world. In 1 970, he became executive director of the United Negro
College Fund. In 1972, he became president of the National
Urban League, a pro-business civil rights organization—a job he
held for ten years. Both posts allowed Jordan to gracefully expand
his personal network, to the point where, in 1 982, Akin Gump paid
him quite a hefty price for his services. "Vernon did not come
cheap," said Strauss. "But I told him: 'We'll carry you for a few
years until you figure out what it's all about here, then you will carry
us for a long time after that.'"
Jordan's career is a wonderful example of the opportunity that
comes from bringing different people together from different
worlds and different organizations to do good things. When Jor
dan became a public figure during the Clinton-Lewinsky scandal,
he was challenged on his claim that it was normal for him to help
a virtual stranger like Monica Lewinsky find a job. His network
once again came to his aid. Washington attorney Leslie Thornton
detailed in the Wall Street Journal how Jordan had gone out of
his way to help her and others. She revealed what many young
black and white professionals had long known privately: Jordan
had been opening doors for people of all colors and creeds for
decades.