15 Technology Is a Terrible Master
There is more to life than just increasing its speed.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
Technology can be your best friend or your worst enemy. Technology becomes
the enemy when we give in to an obsessive need to communicate continually.
This compulsion to stay plugged in leaves us all psychologically breathless. We
have no time to stop, smell the roses, and collect our thoughts.
You Have a Choice
The key is to keep your relationship with technology under control. Bill Gross,
who managed more than $600 billion in fixed-income funds and bonds when he
was with PIMCO, is famous for exercising regularly and meditating daily to
keep centered while using no technology at all. Despite turning off all his
devices, he never misses an important message.
For you to stay calm, clearheaded, and capable of performing at your best,
detach on a regular basis from the technology that overwhelms you. A researcher
who asked a group of CEOs and entrepreneurs to unplug from technology found
they had improved memory, deeper relationships, better sleep, and a greater
likelihood of making life-transforming decisions.1
When people are too plugged in, communications technology quickly
becomes a destructive addiction. People wake up in the morning and obsessively
check all their phone notifications before leaving their beds. They then race to
their computers for yet more typing—before even eating breakfast, drinking
water, or brushing their teeth! People are now checking their smartphones about
forty-six times each day according to one study2 and about eighty-five times a
day according to another study, which found that “people were accessing their
phones twice as often as they thought.”3

Don’t Become Addicted
In Washington not long ago, I was at a business luncheon with a roomful of
high-level executives. Prior to the beginning of the luncheon, one of the
organizers stood up and said a short grace. All the executives bowed their heads.
When the grace was over, the luncheon began.
However, at my table, four or five out of the eight people seemed to have
been greatly affected by the prayer. They kept their heads down and their hands
in their laps, even when the food was served. They seemed to be lost in deep
thought over the profound questions of the day.
Then I realized that they were not praying at all. They were all intensely
focused on their smartphones, sending and receiving e-mails, typing like frantic
teenagers playing video games. They were all lost to the world around them,
drowning in a deep sink full of information exchange.
Take Back Your Time
One of my clients found himself bound and chained to his computer, receiving
and responding to e-mails several hours each day. The more time he spent at his
computer, the fewer of his other important tasks he was able to get done. The
stress caused by these undone tasks, building up like an avalanche overhang,
started to affect his personality, his health, and his sleeping habits.
We taught him about the 80/20 Rule and how it applied to e-mails. He deleted
and unsubscribed from the 80 percent of his e-mails that had no value. Of the
remaining 20 percent, only 4 percent required immediate responses. The other
16 percent could be transferred to an action folder to be worked on later.
Refuse to Be a Slave
Unchain yourself from your computer. Unsubscribe from all unwanted
newsletters. Set up an autoresponder that says, “I check my e-mail only twice
per day. I will reply as soon as possible. If this is an emergency, phone this
number.”
A journalist for Fortune magazine once wrote that when he arrived back at
the office after a two-week European vacation, he had more than 700 e-mails
waiting for him. He realized that it would take him a week to get through them
all before starting on important projects.
For the first time in his career, he took a deep breath and punched the Delete

All button, erasing those 700 e-mails forever. He then got busy with the projects
that were really important to him and his company.
His explanation was simple: “I realized that, just because somebody sends me
an e-mail, it does not mean that they own a piece of my life.” Although not many
people would delete their entire in-box, you can definitely delete and ignore
more e-mails than you do right now. Empower yourself to remove all e-mails
that don’t relate to important goals and relationships.
Someone Will Tell You
People often ask me at my seminars, “But don’t you have to stay plugged into
technology to keep current with the news?” I tell them, “If it is really important,
someone will tell you.” Many people unplug from the news, and surprisingly
enough, they remain well informed on most important subjects. You should do
the same.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Resolve today to create zones of silence during your day-to-day
activities. Turn off your computer and your smartphone for one hour in the
morning and one hour in the afternoon. You will be amazed at what
happens: nothing.
2. Resolve to unplug from technology for one full day each week. By the
end of your digital detox, your mind will be calm and clear. When your
mental batteries have time to recharge, you will be much more effective at
eating frogs.