CHAPTER 3
What's Your Mission?
"Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?"
"That depends a good deal on where you want to get to," said
the Cat.
"I don't much care where—" said Alice.
"Then it doesn't matter which way you go," said the Cat.
—Alice's Adventures in Wonderland BY LEWIS CARROLL
Do you want to become a CEO or a senator? Rise to the top of
your profession or to the top of your child's school board?
Make more money or more friends?
The more specific you are about what you want to do, the eas
ier it becomes to develop a strategy to accomplish it. Part of that
strategy, of course, is establishing relationships with the people in
your universe who can help you get where you're going.
Every successful person I've met shared, in varying degrees, a
zeal for goal setting. Successful athletes, CEOs, charismatic lead
ers, rainmaking salespeople, and accomplished managers all know
what they want in life, and they go after it.
As my dad used to say, no one becomes an astronaut by
accident. Luck has little to do with achievement, as a study cited
in Success magazine makes clear. In the study, researchers asked
Yale's class of 1953 a number of questions. Three had to do with
goals:
Have you set goals?
Have you written them down?
Do you have a plan to accomplish them?
It turned out that only 3 percent of the Yale class had written
down their goals, with a plan of action to achieve them. Thirteen
percent had goals but had not written them down. Fully 84 per
cent had no specific goals at all, other than to "enjoy themselves."
In 1973, when the same class was resurveyed, the differences
between the goal setters and everyone else were stunning. The 13
percent who had goals that were not in writing were earning, on
average, twice as much as the 84 percent of students who had no
goals at all. But most surprising of all, the 3 percent who had writ
ten their goals down were earning, on average, ten times as much
as the other 97 percent of graduates combined!
My own focus on goal setting started early. As a Yale under-
grad, I thought I wanted to become a politician, a future governor
of Pennsylvania. (I really was that specific, and that naive.) But I
learned that the more concrete my goal, the more I could accom
plish toward it. In my sophomore year, I became chairman of
Yale's political union, where so many alumni had cut their teeth
before going on to careers in politics. When I became interested in
joining a fraternity, I didn't simply join the first organization
available to me. I researched which fraternity had the most active
politicians as alumni. Sigma Chi had a rich tradition and an
alumni roster of impressive leaders. But the fraternity wasn't char
tered at Yale at that time. So we founded a chapter.
Eventually I ran for New Haven City Council. I lost, but in the
process met everyone from William F. Buckley and Governor of
Pennsylvania Dick Thornburg to the president of Yale, Bart Gia-
matti. I made regular visits to see Bart up until he died; he was a
virtual oracle of advice and contacts for me. Even then, I recog
nized how something as simple as a clearly defined goal distin
guished me from all those who simply floated through school
waiting for things to happen. Later, I would apply this insight with
even more vigor.
At Deloitte & Touche, for example, it was one of the ways I
differentiated myself from the other postgrad consultants. I knew
I needed a focus, a direction that I could pour my energies into.
An article by Michael Hammer that I read in business school gave
me that focus. Coauthor of Reengineering the Corporation, Ham
mer's ideas were taking the business world by storm and were on
the verge of creating a new segment for consulting services.
Here was a chance to become an expert on a relatively new
body of knowledge and research that was quickly becoming in hot
demand. I read all the case studies and attended every conference
or lecture I could. Wherever Michael Hammer was, there was I.
Over time, he thankfully saw me less as a stalker and more as a
pupil and friend. My access to Michael Hammer, and my growing
knowledge in the field, helped me broker a much stronger rela
tionship between my company and one of the business world's
most influential and respected thinkers. Publicity and profits fol
lowed for Deloitte as they became a company at the forefront of
the reengineering movement. And with that success, my career,
which had once been on shaky ground, began to soar.
Countless books have been written about goal setting over
the last few decades. Yes, it really is that important. Over the years,
I've refined my own goal-setting process into three steps. But
the key is to make setting goals a habit. If you do that, goal setting
becomes a part of your life. If you don't, it withers and dies.
Step One: Find Your Passion
The best definition of a "goal" I've ever heard came from an
extraordinarily successful saleswoman I met at a conference who
told me, "A goal is a dream with a deadline." That marvelous defi
nition drives home a very important point. Before you start writ
ing down your goals, you'd better know what your dream is.
Otherwise, you might find yourself headed for a destination you
never wanted to get to in the first place.
Studies indicate that well over 50 percent of Americans are
unhappy at work. Many of these people are doing well, but they
are doing well at something they don't enjoy. How we got our
selves into such a situation isn't difficult to understand. People get
overwhelmed by the decisions they have to make about their jobs,
their families, their businesses, their futures. There are too many
choices, it seems. We end up shifting our focus to talents we don't
have and careers that don't quite fit. Many of us respond by sim
ply falling into whatever comes down the pike without ever asking
ourselves some very important questions.
Have you ever sat down and thought seriously about what you
truly love? What you're good at? What you want to accomplish in
life? What are the obstacles that are stopping you? Most people
don't. They accept what they "should" be doing, rather than take
the time to figure out what they want to be doing.
We all have our own loves, insecurities, strengths, weaknesses,
and unique capabilities. And we have to take those into account in
figuring out where our talents and desires intersect. That intersec
tion is what I call your "blue flame"—where passion and ability
come together. When that blue flame is ignited within a person, it
is a powerful force in getting you where you want to go.
I think of the blue flame as a convergence of mission and pas
sion founded on a realistic self-assessment of your abilities. It
helps determine your life's purpose, from taking care of the el
derly to becoming a mother, from being a top engineer to becom
ing a writer or a musician. I believe everyone has a distinct
mission inside of him or her, one that has the capacity to inspire.
Joseph Campbell, who coined the phrase "follow your bliss" in
the early 1900s, was a graduate student at Columbia University. His
blue flame, he decided, was the study of Greek mythology. When
he was told there was no such major, he devised his own plan.
After graduation, he moved into a cabin in Woodstock, New
York, where he did nothing but read from nine in the morning
until six or seven each night for five years. There isn't exactly a
career track for lovers of Greek myth. Campbell emerged from the
woods a very, very knowledgeable man, but he still had no clue
what to do with his life. He persisted in following his love of
mythology anyway.
The people who met him during this time were astonished by
his wisdom and passion. Eventually, he was invited to speak at
Sarah Lawrence College. One lecture led to another, until finally,
when Campbell looked up one day twenty-eight years later, he was
a famous author and professor of mythology, doing what he
loved, at the same school that had given him his first break. "If you
follow your bliss, you put yourself on a kind of track that has been
there all the while, waiting for you, and the life that you ought to
be living is the one you are living."
So how do you figure out your bliss?
Campbell believed that deep within each person, there's an
intuitive knowledge of what she or he wants most in life. We only
have to look for it.
Well, I agree with Dr. Campbell. All good decisions, I'm con
vinced, come from good information. Deciding on your passion,
your bliss, your blue flame is no different. There are two aspects to
getting good information. One part comes from within you; the
other part comes from those around you.
1. Look inside
There are many ways to conduct a self-assessment of your goals
and dreams. Some people pray. Others meditate or read. Some
exercise. A few seek long periods of solitude.
The important thing when conducting an internal review is to
do without the constraints, without the doubts, fears, and expec
tations of what you "should" be doing. You have to be able to set
aside the obstacles of time, money, and obligation.
When I'm in the right frame of mind, I start to create a list of
dreams and goals. Some are preposterous; others are overly prag
matic. I don't attempt to censure or edit the nature of the list—I
put anything and everything down. Next to that first list, I write
down in a second column all the things that bring me joy and
pleasure: the achievements, people, and things that move me. The
clues can be found in the hobbies you pursue and the magazines,
movies, and books you enjoy. Which activities excite you the
most, where you don't even notice the hours that pass?
When I'm done, I start to connect these two lists, looking for
intersections, that sense of direction or purpose. It's a simple exer
cise, but the results can be profound.
2. Look outside
Next, ask the people who know you best what they think your
greatest strengths and weaknesses are. Ask them what they admire
about you and what areas you may need help in.
Before long, you'll find that the information you're getting
from your own review and the input you receive from others will
lead you to some very concrete conclusions about what your mis
sion or direction should be.
Some of the business world's toughest CEOs and entrepre
neurs are big believers in this notion of the blue flame—although
they probably don't call it that.
James Champy, celebrated consultant and coauthor of Reengi-
neering the Corporation, claims that success is first and foremost a
matter of our dreams. In his book The Arc of Ambition, Champy
found that the abilities of successful leaders like Ted Turner, Michael
Dell, and Jack Welch are less important than the fact that each shares
a clearly defined mission that drives him in all that he does.
When Champy asked Michael Dell where he found the ambi
tion to build Dell computers, the CEO started to talk about busi
ness cycles and technology. Then he stopped.
"You know where I think the dream really came from?" he said.
He described driving to school through the suburbs of Houston
and ogling the office buildings with their great flagpoles. Dell
wanted a flagpole. He wanted that kind of presence. To him, it was
a symbol of success, and it drove him to envision starting up his
own company before he could legally order a drink. Today, he has
three flagpoles. I've spoken to Michael a number of times about
his strategy at Dell, and it's amazing how each and every time this
dream comes through clearly.
Human ambitions are like Japanese carp; they grow propor
tional to the size of their environment. Our achievements grow
according to the size of our dreams and the degree to which we are
in touch with our mission.
Coming up with goals, updating them, and monitoring our
progress in achieving them is less important, I believe, than the
process of emotionally deciding what it is you want to do.
Does that mean a hopeless dreamer could have run GE as well
as Neutron Jack? Of course not. The transformation of a dream
into reality requires hard work and discipline.
"Welch might resent the fact that I say, 'Jack, you're a dreamer,'"
says Champy. "But the truth is he's a disciplined dreamer. He has
the ability and sensibility that allows him to walk into various
industries and see where the opportunities are."
Disciplined dreamers all have one thing in common: a mis
sion. The mission is often risky, unconventional, and most likely
tough as hell to achieve. But it is possible. The kind of discipline
that turns a dream into a mission, and a mission into a reality,
really just comes down to a process of setting goals.
Step Two: Putting Goals to Paper
Turning a mission into a reality does not "just happen." It is
built like any work of art or commerce, from the ground up. First,
it must be imagined. Then, one needs to gather the skills, tools,
and materials needed. It takes time. It requires thought, determi
nation, persistence, and faith.
The tool I use is something I call the Networking Action Plan.
The Plan is separated into three distinct parts: The first part is
devoted to the development of the goals that will help you fulfill
your mission. The second part is devoted to connecting those goals
to the people, places, and things that will help you get the job done.
And the third part helps you determine the best way to reach out to
the people who will help you to accomplish your goals.
It's a bare-bones, straightforward worksheet, but it has been
extraordinarily helpful to me, my sales staff, and many of my
friends.
In the first section, I list what I'd like to accomplish three years
from today. I then work backward in both one-year and three-
month increments to develop mid- and short-term goals that will
help me reach my mission. Under each time frame, I create an "A"
and a "B" goal that will meaningfully contribute to where I want
to be three years from now.
A close friend, Jamie, offers a good example of how this works.
Jamie was struggling to find direction in her life. She had gradu
ated with a Ph.D. in history from Harvard, thinking she'd become
a professor. But she found academia too stuffy. She gave business
a shot, but found the world of commerce unrewarding. So Jamie
spent several months living in Manhattan thinking about where
she was going in life, until it occurred to her that what she really
wanted to do was teach children.
I asked Jamie to give my Networking Action Plan a try. She was
skeptical at first. "That may be good for MBA types, but I'm not
sure it works for people like me," she insisted. Nonetheless, she
agreed to try it.
So she set about filling out the worksheet. Her "A" goal three
years forward was to be a teacher. Her three-year "B" goal was to
be a teacher in a well-respected district located in a place she
wanted to live. Then she filled in his short-term A and B goals.
In ninety days, she wanted to be well on her way toward
becoming certified as a high school teacher, enrolling in some type
of program that would help professionals transition into the field
of education. In a year, she wanted to be teaching full-time; she
made a list of some of the best high schools in Manhattan that she
might enjoy working at.
In the second part of the Plan, broken up in similar time incre
ments, she had to name one or two people for each A and B goal
who she thought could get her one step closer to making her goal
a reality.
Jamie did her research and found the contact for a program
that places midcareer professionals into teaching positions. She
also found out the names of the people at each of the best high
schools she had listed who were responsible for hiring. Finally, she
found the number for an organization that provides teaching cer
tification courses.
Within a couple of weeks, Jamie was on her way. She started to
see the symbiotic relationship between goal setting and reaching
out to the people who can help us achieve those goals. The more
she accomplished, the bigger her teaching network grew. The big
ger her teaching network grew, the closer she came to accomplish
ing her three-year goals.
Ultimately, the third stage helps you assess which of the strate
gies I'll show you in the following chapters will be most successful.
With some people, it will require you cold-call them (which we'll
talk more about later). Others you'll be able to reach through
friends of friends; still others might best be acquainted through a
dinner party or conference. I'll teach you how to utilize all these
methods and more.
Jamie is now a tenured high school history teacher in one of
the best high schools in the country, in Beverly Hills, California.
And she loves the job.
This process can be used by almost anyone, whatever your
career. After completing the worksheet, you'll have a mission.
You'll have the name of a flesh-and-blood person who can help
you take the next step in achieving that mission. And you'll have
one, or perhaps several, ways to reach out to that person.
The purpose of this exercise is to show that there is a process, a
system if you will, involved in building a network. It's not magical;
it's not reserved for a select few born with an inherent gift for
being social. Connecting with others really just involves having a
predetermined plan and carrying it out, whether you want to be a
ninth-grade history teacher or start your own business.
Moreover, you can apply the worksheet to every aspect of your
life: to expand your network of friends, further your education,
find a lifelong partner, and search for spiritual guidance.
Once you have your plan, post it in a place (or places) where
you will see it on a regular basis. Share your goals with others. This
is very powerful and perhaps one of the most rewarding aspects of
having clear goals—there are hidden opportunities waiting to be
accessed in everyone if you just tell them what you want.
Fill this sheet out now, before going on to the next chapter. I
like to keep some variation of it in my Palm to remind myself reg
ularly what I need to be accomplishing, and whom I need to reach
out to. A few years ago, I laminated a small version of the sheet
and kept it in my wallet.
But your goals must be in writing. Have the conviction to put
your intentions to paper. An unwritten wish is just a dream. In
writing, it's a commitment, a goal.
Here are a few other criteria to consider when filling out your
Networking Action Plan, or NAP:
• Your goals must be specific. Vague, sweeping goals are too broad
to be acted upon. They must be concrete and detailed. Know
what steps you'll take to achieve your goal, the date by which it
will be accomplished, and the measurement you'll use to gauge
whether you've achieved the goal or not. I tell my salespeople
that setting a goal like "I'm going to have my best quarter ever"
is not enough. Will they make $100,000 or $500,000?
• Your goals must be believable. If you don't believe you can
reach them, you won't. If your goal is to increase the revenues
of your business to five million dollars in a year, and you only
achieve revenues of one million, you're setting yourself up for
failure. Instead, set your goal at half a million dollars for the
year—and beat the heck out of it.
• Your goals must be challenging and demanding. Step out of
your comfort zone; set goals that require risk and uncertainty.
And when you achieve your goal, set another one. One of the
best salesmen I've ever met is a man my father knew named
Lyle, who sold books door-to-door. He would set annual sales
goals for himself, write them down, and place them wherever
he could: in his wallet, on his refrigerator, in his desk.
Inevitably, he'd reach his goal months ahead of schedule. Then
he'd simply write down another one. The man was never satis
fied. What matters is the goal setting, Lyle would say, not the
goal getting. He may have been the only door-to-door book
salesman in Pennsylvania—or anywhere else, for that mat
ter—who died a rich man.
Next, take ACTIOM It's called a Networking Action Plan for a
reason. To prepare yourself to run a marathon, you must get out
there and jog every day. With a plan in place, it's up to you to start
reaching out. Every day!
Step Three: Create a Personal "Board of Advisors"
Goals, like everything else I write about in this book, aren't
achieved alone. With a plan in place, you're going to need rein-
forcement to stay focused. As in any business, even the best-
conceived plans benefit from external vetting.
It helps to have an enlightened counselor, or two or three, to
act as both cheerleader and eagle-eyed supervisor, who will hold
you accountable. I call this group my Personal Board of Advisors.
They may be made up of family members; perhaps someone
who's been a mentor to you; even an old friend or two.
My board came to my own aid at a critical juncture in my
career after I left Starwood Hotels and Resorts, the company that
owns such brands as the W Hotel and the Westin. I was adrift. For
the first time in my life, I couldn't lay claim to a title or a job. I had
to reassess my mission.
I had come to Starwood from Deloitte to accept what was an
irresistible offer: to be the youngest chief marketing officer in a
Fortune 500 company (a goal I had set for myself three years ear
lier) and reinvent the way an industry thought about marketing.
But my new job didn't go exactly as planned.
Juergen Bartels, the president at Starwood who recruited me,
promised to mentor me and pave my way toward becoming a
future leader of the company. My goals for the company were
large and required changing an entire company's way of thinking.
Up until that point, marketing in the hospitality industry was
a regional affair, often left to individual hotels. But the cost of that
arrangement was a lack of company-wide brand consistency. Our
plan was to consolidate our marketing functions under one roof
with a global outlook. Rather than allow each of our regions
around the world to set their own individual marketing strategies,
I wanted to centralize our marketing operations more in order to
clarify our message and create greater impact in the marketplace
with a cohesive brand. After all, our primary customers—business
travelers—were increasingly global and expected consistency.
Shortly after I was hired, however, Juergen Bartels left the
company. Corporations, like any bureaucracy, tend to resist
change, especially when the change doesn't have the support of top
management. It became clear, a year into my job, that under the
latest president I wouldn't be able to garner the kind of support
within the company I needed for such a radical reorganization.
The new president made it clear that we would not be moving
forward with our plan to reorganize the marketing department.
The writing was on the wall for the plan and for me personally.
Without the go-ahead needed to make the kind of bold decisions
that I felt would ultimately lead to company success and a more
senior personal position, I knew I wouldn't be able to reach my
goals here.
I was shocked. I left work early that particular day and jogged
mile after mile through the beautiful paths of New York's Central
Park. Exercise has always been a refuge where I do some of my best
thinking. But some ten miles later, I was still in shock.
The next morning, as I walked into the office, I knew that
my future was somewhere else. All the accoutrements of a top
executive's life—the large, cushy office, the mahogany furniture,
the corporate jet, the fancy title on the door—meant nothing if I
couldn't implement the ideas that made work fun, creative, and
exciting. I officially resigned soon after, and if I hadn't, I know I
wouldn't have been long for the company anyway.
It was time for me to establish a new goal. Should I seek out
another position as chief marketing officer, proving myself by
building bigger and better brands, striving for greater revenue
(and profits), and helping to turn a company into a brand icon?
Or should I set my sights even higher? My ultimate goal was to
become a CEO. But it seldom happens for those in marketing. I
had spent the greater part of my career convincing top manage
ment that marketing can and should directly influence all operat
ing activities, yet I was not responsible for all of them.
To truly define the brand, the ultimate marketing job was to be
the CEO. If I chose the latter direction, what else did I need to
learn to become CEO? What were my chances of getting such a
job? What sacrifices or risks were involved?
Honestly, these questions weren't clear to me at the time. In the
wake of my disappointment, after years of go-go-go, I felt lost. I
needed to figure out what I wanted to be all over again.
And I was scared. For the first time in ages, I had no company
to attach to my name. I loathed the thought of meeting new peo
ple without a clear explanation of what I did.
Over the next few months, I had hundreds of conversations
with the people I trust. I took a Vipassana meditation retreat
where I sat for ten hours each day for ten days straight—in silence.
For a guy like me, who can't shut up, it was torture. I wondered if
I might fritter away all my time thinking. I wondered if I should go
back to Pennsylvania and find a smaller pond to inhabit.
During that time I wrote a detailed twelve-page mission state
ment asking such questions as What are my strengths? What are
my weaknesses? What are the various industry opportunities
available to me? I listed the venture capitalists I wanted to meet,
the CEOs I knew, the leaders I could turn to for advice, and the
companies that I admired. I left all my options open: teacher, min
ister, politician, chief executive officer. For each potential new
direction, I filled out a Networking Action Plan.
When everything was laid out, I reached out to my personal
board of advisors. I didn't have the qualifications to be appointed
a CEO with a major corporation. Yet when I looked inside myself,
that was exactly what I wanted to do.
Sitting down with Tad Smith, a publishing executive and one
of my best friends and advisors, I was told I had to get over the
prestige of working for a Fortune 500 company. If I wanted to be
CEO, I had to find a company I could grow with.
It was exactly the advice I needed to hear. I had been too
focused on big companies. While the dot-com crash had made
entering the digital world a whole lot less palatable, there were still
some very good companies in need of business fundamentals.
Now I knew this was where I needed to look, and I began refining
my action plan.
From that day on, many of the calls I made, and the meetings
and conferences I attended, were aimed at finding the right small
company to call home. Three months later, I had five job offers.
One of the people I reached out to was Sandy Climan, a well-
known Hollywood player who once served as Michael Ovitz's
right-hand man at Creative Artists Agency and who then ran an
L.A.-based venture-capital firm called Entertainment Media Ven
tures. I had gotten to know Sandy during my time with Deloitte,
when I was exploring paths into the entertainment world. Sandy
introduced me to the people at a company called YaYa, one of the
investments in his firm's portfolio.
YaYa was a marketing company pioneering the creation of
online games as advertising vehicles. They had a good concept and
the strength of committed employees and founders. They needed
a bigger vision to get the market's attention, some buzz for their
then-unknown product, and someone who could use all that to
sell, sell, sell.
In November 2000, when the YaYa board offered me the CEO
position, I knew it was the right fit. The company was located in
Los Angeles, and it offered the sort of unconventional route into
the entertainment world I had been looking for and a chance to
bring my experience as a marketer to the CEO job.
If Virginia Can Do It, You Can Too
A few months ago, a friend of mine told me about a woman named
Virginia Feigles, who lived not too far away from where I grew up.
He had been inspired by her tale of triumph. Hearing her story, I felt
the same way.
At forty-four, Feigles decided she no longer wanted to be a hair
dresser; she wanted to be an engineer. From the get-go, there were
naysayers, people who insisted it couldn't be done. Their negativity
simply provided more fuel for her fire.
"I lost a lot of friends during this whole thing," Feigles says. "Peo
ple become jealous when you decide to do what no one thought
you would, or could. You just have to push through."
Her adventure reads like a Cliffs Notes guide to career manage
ment where a bold mission and a commitment to reach out to oth
ers combine to create opportunities previously unavailable to a
high school graduate. It also conveys a harsh dose of reality:
Change is hard. You might lose friends, encounter seemingly insur
mountable obstacles, and face the most troubling hurdle of all—
your own self-doubt.
Feigles had always planned to go to college. Raised by a single
mother in small-town Milton, Pennsylvania, the opportunities were
slim. She was married by seventeen and pregnant a year later. She
worked full time as a hairstylist in her husband's salon and raised
her only son. Twenty years went by. With her second divorce,
Feigles rethought her life. Growth, she reflected, came only from
change. And change came only from new goals.
She was working part-time as a secretary at the chamber of com
merce when she realized life had more to offer. "I just thought, 'This
is stupid. Why am I on the wrong end of this? Not everyone who
has a Ph.D. in physics is Albert Einstein.'"
While it's true not every engineer is a genius, they all know alge
bra—something Feigles couldn't claim. So she buckled down and
learned the subject within a few months.
After a summer stint at community college, she decided to apply
to a top-tier civil engineering school at Bucknell University. The
associate dean, Trudy Cunningham, didn't sugarcoat the situation.
"When she arrived, I told her that life was about to get hard.
She's an adult with a life, an apartment, a car, and she was com
peting with kids who were living in dorms and having their meals
cooked."
Luckily, Feigles had always been an avid connector all her life.
She was a member of a number of community organizations, serv-
ing on the boards of the YMCA, Milton Chamber of Commerce,
and Parks and Recreation Committee. She also had stints serving as
president of the Garden Club and the Milton Business Association.
She had supportive friends and advisors all around.
For the other students, the end of class meant keg parties and
football games. For her, it meant a night working at the salon fol
lowed by grinding study sessions. Feigles doesn't remember a day
she didn't think of quitting.
She remembers getting back her first physics test. She failed.
"Another student thought it was the end of the world. I told her
not to worry, I wasn't about to commit suicide," she recalls with the
wry insight reserved for someone who's been through it. She ended
up with a C in the class.
Many sleepless nights and several Cs later, Feigles found herself
among 137 other engineers in the graduating class of 1999. No
one was more astonished than the graduate herself: "I just kept on
thinking, 'What have I done?' And then repeating to myself, 'I've
done it, I've actually done it!'"
With her goals completed, her network has grown—and not
only in terms of friends and new business contacts. Today, she's
newly married—to her former boss at the chamber of commerce—
and busy with a budding career at the state's Department of Trans
portation. Recently she became chairperson of the Planning
Commission, where she used to take notes as a secretary.
Reaching your goals can be difficult. But if you have goals to
begin with, a realizable plan to achieve them, and a cast of trusted
friends to help you, you can do just about anything—even becom
ing an engineer after the age of forty.
CONNECTORS' HALL OF FAME PROFILE
Bill Clinton
"Know your mission in life."
In 1968, when William Jefferson Clinton was a Rhodes Scholar at
Oxford University, he met a graduate student named Jeffrey Stamps
at a party. Clinton promptly pulled out a black address book.
"What are you doing here at Oxford, Jeff?" he asked.
"I'm at Pembroke on a Fulbright," Jeff replied. Clinton penned
"Pembroke" into his book, then asked about Stamps's undergradu
ate school and his major. "Bill, why are you writing this down?"
asked Stamps.
"I'm going into politics and plan to run for governor of Arkansas,
and I'm keeping track of everyone I meet," said Clinton.
That story, recounted by Stamps, epitomizes Bill Clinton's forth
right approach to reaching out and including others in his mission.
He knew, even then, that he wanted to run for office, and his sense
of purpose emboldened his efforts with both passion and sincerity.
In fact, as an undergraduate at Georgetown, the forty-second pres
ident made it a nightly habit to record, on index cards, the names
and vital information of every person whom he'd met that day.
Throughout his career, Clinton's political aspirations and his abil
ity to reach out to others have gone hand-in-hand. In 1984, when
he was governor of Arkansas, he attended, for the first time, a
national networking and thought leadership event called Renais
sance Weekend in Hilton Head, South Carolina. Clinton secured
an invitation through his friend, Richard Riley, who was then gover
nor of South Carolina. Attending Renaissance Weekend was like a
trip to a toy store for a guy like Clinton, who wasted no time meet
ing others and making friends. Here's how a Washington Post arti
cle from December 1992 describes Clinton in action at the event:
Many guests, reflecting on Clinton's presence, remember
images more than words: how he would roam from discus
sion to discussion and take a spot at the side of the room,
leaning casually against the wall; how he would seem to
know everyone, not just from their name tags, but remember
what they did and what they were interested in. "He hugs
you," said Max Heller, the former mayor of Greenville. "He
hugs you not only physically, but with a whole attitude."
What Heller is referring to is Clinton's unique ability to create an
almost instantaneous intimacy with whomever he's talking to. Clin
ton doesn't just recall your personal information; he uses the infor
mation as a means to affirm a bond with you.
From Clinton, two lessons are clear: First, the more specific you
are about where you want to go in life, the easier it becomes to
develop a networking strategy to get there.
Second, be sensitive to making a real connection in your inter
actions with others. There is almost an expectation among us that
whoever becomes rich or powerful can be forgiven for high-handed
behavior. Clinton illustrates how charming and popular you can
become, and remain, when you treat everyone you meet with
sincerity.