21 Single Handle Every Task
Herein lies the secret of true power. Learn, by constant practice,
how to husband your resources, and to concentrate them at any
given moment upon a given point.
JAMES ALLEN
Eat that frog! Every bit of planning, prioritizing, and organizing comes down to
this simple concept.
Every great achievement of humankind has been preceded by a long period of
hard, concentrated work until the job was done. Your ability to select your most
important task, to begin it, and then to concentrate on it single-mindedly until it
is complete is the key to high levels of performance and personal productivity.
Once You Get Going, Keep Going
Single handling requires that once you begin, you keep working at the task
without diversion or distraction until the job is 100 percent complete. You keep
urging yourself onward by repeating the words “Back to work!” over and over
whenever you are tempted to stop or do something else.
By concentrating single-mindedly on your most important task, you can
reduce the time required to complete it by 50 percent or more.
It has been estimated that the tendency to start and stop a task—to pick it up,
put it down, and come back to it—can increase the time necessary to complete
the task by as much as 500 percent. Each time you return to the task, you have to
familiarize yourself with where you were when you stopped and what you still
have to do. You have to overcome inertia and get yourself going again. You
have to develop momentum and get into a productive work rhythm.
But when you prepare thoroughly and then begin, refusing to stop or turn
aside until the job is done, you develop energy, enthusiasm, and motivation. You
get better and better and more productive. You work faster and more effectively.

get better and better and more productive. You work faster and more effectively.
Don’t Waste Time
The truth is that once you have decided on your number one task, anything else
that you do other than that is a relative waste of time. Any other activity is just
not as valuable or as important as this job, based on your own priorities.
The more you discipline yourself to working nonstop on a single task, the
more you progress along the “efficiency curve.” You get more and more high-
quality work done in less and less time.
Each time you stop working, however, you break this cycle and move back
along the curve to where every part of the task is more difficult and time
consuming.
Self-Discipline Is the Key
Elbert Hubbard defined self-discipline as “the ability to make yourself do what
you should do, when you should do it, whether you feel like it or not.”
In the final analysis, success in any area requires tons of discipline. Self-
discipline, self-mastery, and self-control are the basic building blocks of both
character and high performance.
Starting a high-priority task and persisting with that task until it is 100 percent
complete is the true test of your character, your willpower, and your resolve.
Persistence is actually self-discipline in action. The good news is that the more
you discipline yourself to persist on a major task, the more you like and respect
yourself, and the higher is your self-esteem. And the more you like and respect
yourself, the easier it is for you to discipline yourself to persist even more.
By focusing clearly on your most valuable task and concentrating single-
mindedly until it is 100 percent complete, you actually shape and mold your own
character. You become a superior person.
You feel stronger, more competent, more confident, and happier. You feel
more powerful and productive.
You eventually feel capable of setting and achieving any goal. You become
the master of your own destiny. You place yourself on an ascending spiral of
personal effectiveness on which your future is absolutely guaranteed.
And the key to all of this is for you to determine the most valuable and
important thing you could possibly do at every single moment and then Eat That
Frog!

EAT THAT FROG!
1. Take action! Resolve today to select the most important task or project
that you could complete and then launch into it immediately.
2. Once you start your most important task, discipline yourself to persevere
without diversion or distraction until it is 100 percent complete. See it as a
test to determine whether you are the kind of person who can make a
decision to complete something and then carry it out. Once you begin,
refuse to stop until the job is finished.