CHAPTER 1 2
Share Your Passions
Ihave a confession to make. I've never been to a so-called "net
working event" in my life.
If properly organized, these get-togethers in theory could work.
Most, however, are for the desperate and uninformed. The average
attendees are often unemployed and too quick to pass on their
resumes to anyone with a free hand—usually the hand of someone
else who is unemployed looking to pass on his resume. Imagine a
congregation of people with nothing in common except jobless
ness. That's not exactly a recipe for facilitating close bonds.
When it comes to meeting people, it's not only whom you get
to know but also how and where you get to know them.
For example, take the first-class section on an airplane. Flying
first class is not something most people can afford, but there's an
interesting camaraderie among those front seats that you won't
find back in coach. To begin with, there are always a number of
movers and shakers up front, in close quarters, for hours at a time.
Because they've slapped down an absurd premium for the luxury
of getting off the plane a few seconds earlier than the rest of the
passengers, fellow first-classers assume you, too, are important,
and they often seek to quench their curiosity about who you are
and why you're as dumb as they are to pay such an inflated price.
I can't tell you how many valuable clients and contacts I've met
during a conversation struck up during an in-flight meal. (By the
way, this is the only acceptable time to bother your seat mate.)
At a so-called "networking event," the dynamics are just the
opposite. People assume you're in the same boat they are—des
perate. Credibility is hard to gain. If you're jobless, doesn't it make
more sense to hang with the job-givers than fellow job-seekers?
There are better ways, and better places, to spend your time.
Shared interests are the basic building blocks of any relation
ship. Race, religion, gender, sexual orientation, ethnicity, or busi
ness, professional, and personal interests are relational glue. It
makes sense, then, that events and activities where you'll thrive are
those built around interests you're most passionate about.
Friendship is created out of the quality of time spent between
two people, not the quantity. There is a misconception that to
build a bond, two people need to spend a great deal of time
together. This is not the case. Outside your family and work, you
probably can count the people you see a great deal of in the course
of a month on two hands. Yet, surely, you have more than ten
friends. It is what you do together that matters, not how often you
meet. That's why you have to pay special attention to where you're
most comfortable and what activities you most enjoy.
Usually it's the events and activities you excel at that you're
most passionate about. So it makes sense to make these the focus
of your efforts. For me, my love of food and exercise has led to the
most amazing get-togethers. For others, it maybe stamps, baseball
cards, politics, or skydiving that brings you together.
The power of shared passion in bringing people together can
be seen today in the rising trend of blogs, or Web logs. Blogs are
online journals, usually dedicated to an individual's interests, con
taining commentary and links to relevant news and information.
Popular blogs attract like-minded legions to their sites. The blog-
osphere (the community of active bloggers writing on topics that
range from spirituality to sports) has grown from a dozen or so
Web logs in 1999 to an estimated five million today.
When they write the history of the 2004 presidential cam
paign, an entire chapter could be dedicated to blogs. No other
innovation in the last twenty years has influenced electoral poli
tics quite like these impassioned online communities. They've gal
vanized an unprecedented number of voters into action, raised
millions, and given people an outlet to participate in the political
process. It's amazing to think that one person, writing about what
or whom they love, could have so much influence or create a com
munity of people so quickly.
When we are truly passionate about something, it's conta
gious. Our passion draws other people to who we are and what we
care about. Others respond by letting their guard down. Which is
why sharing your passion is important in business.
I can tell more about how someone is likely to react in a
business situation from my experience with them at an intimate
dinner, or after just one strenuous workout, than I can from any
number of in-office meetings. We just naturally loosen up outside
the office. Or perhaps it's the venue itself—not to mention the
wine over dinner. It's astonishing how much more you can learn
about someone when you are both doing something you enjoy.
I have a friend who is the executive vice president of a large
bank in Charlotte. His networking hotspot is, of all places, the
YMCA. He tells me that at 5 and 6 in the morning, the place is
buzzing with exercise fanatics like himself getting in a workout
before they go to the office. He scouts the place for entrepreneurs,
current customers, and prospects. Then, as he's huffing and puff
ing on the StairMaster, he answers their questions about invest
ments and loans.
Besides food and exercise, I sometimes take people to church.
That's right, church. I attend a mostly African-American and His
panic Catholic Church in Los Angeles—St. Agatha's. It's wonder
fully "unorthodox." Instead of "passing the peace" in the form of a
simple handshake, a gospel choir belts out uplifting tunes while
the congregants walk around the church hugging each other for
ten minutes. It's an amazing scene. I don't try to foist my beliefs on
anyone; the people I bring along—whether an actor or lawyer or
an atheist or Orthodox Jew—tend to see my invitation as a kind of
personalized gift. It shows them that I think so highly of them that
I'm willing to share such a deeply personal part of my life.
Contrary to popular business wisdom, I don't believe there has
to be a rigid line between our private and public lives. Old-school
business views the expression of emotions and compassion as vul
nerability; today's new businesspeople see such attributes as the
glue that binds us. When our relationships are stronger, our busi
nesses and careers are more successful.
Take Bonnie Degrius, a consultant who used to work at the
Gartner Group. Bonnie sends her list of contacts and associates an
annual newsletter that is, well, all about her. She writes of the new
and exciting things she's working on, or about her family. She
wrote about how the death of her father changed her life. You
might think those who received this letter were uncomfortable
with such a public display of emotion. Just the opposite. More and
more people—men, women, colleagues, and strangers alike—
asked to receive Bonnie's letter. They'd write her back and tell her
of similar experiences they'd been through. After a few years, Bon
nie had a network that stretched across the nation. She's poured
her heart and passion onto the page and, because of it, she's
received the trust and admiration of hundreds in return.
Make a list of the things you're most passionate about. Use
your passions as a guide to which activities and events you should
be seeking out. Use them to engage new and old contacts. If you
love baseball, for example, take potential and current clients to a
ballgame. It doesn't matter what you do, only that it's something
you love doing.
Your passions and the events you build around them will
create deeper levels of intimacy. Pay attention to matching the
event to the particular relationship you're trying to build. I've got
an informal list of activities I use to keep in touch with my busi
ness and personal friends. Here are some things I like to do:
1. Fifteen minutes and a cup of coffee. It's quick, it's out of the
office, and it's a great way to meet someone new.
2. Conferences. If I'm attending a conference in, say, Seattle, I'll
pull out a list of people in the area I know or would like to
know better and see if they might like to drop in for a particu
larly interesting keynote speech or dinner.
3. Invite someone to share a workout or a hobby (golf, chess,
stamp collecting, a book club, etc.).
4. A quick early breakfast, lunch, drinks after work, or dinner
together. There's nothing like food to break the ice.
5. Invite someone to a special event. For me, a special event such
as the theater, a book-signing party, or a concert is made even
more special if I bring along a few people who I think might
particularly enjoy the occasion.
6. Entertaining at home. I view dinner parties at home as sacred.
I like to make these events as intimate as possible. To ensure
they stay that way, I generally will invite only one or two peo
ple I don't know that well. By dinner's end, I want those people
leaving my home feeling as if they've made a whole new set
of friends, and that's hard to do if it's a dinner filled with
strangers.
Of course, we all need to schedule the appropriate time
with friends and family as well, or just to read or relax. While
enriching your life to include others whenever and wherever you
can, make sure you're not neglecting the key relationships in
your life.
When your day is fueled by passion, filled with interesting
people to share it with, reaching out will seem less like a challenge
or a chore and more like an effortless consequence of the way
you work.