# Module 3: Data-Informed Decision-Making
## Introduction: Data-informed decision-making
# Introduction: Data-informed decision-making Hi there! It's great to have you back. So far, we've talked about tracking and measuring project progress. We've also discussed how to manage quality through different techniques and the benefits of continuous improvement. Now, I'm going to tell you all about data and data-informed decision making. You'll learn how data impacts decisions, some of which occur during a project journey.
You'll get answers to questions like: How do I use data in my project? Which types of data should I search for? And how do I determine what stakeholders need to know? Now, more than ever, we have access to data at our fingertips on our computers, tablets, and phones. We use data every day to view the stats of our favorite athletes, examine our screen time on social media, and monitor our health.
Data is a part of our daily lives. Take, for example, online job search sites. These companies collect basic data you enter—like your previous experience, location, maybe any degrees or certificates you might hold—and use that information to determine potential job matches for you. Jobs that don't fit the criteria of what you entered aren't likely to appear in your suggestions. This is just one way data is used to inform and influence our decisions.
In this module, we'll discuss project data and how it informs decision-making and helps to prevent both major and minor issues. We'll also discuss how project-related data can be used to reach success metrics. We'll go over common project data, such as tasks and issues, and discuss how analyzing this data and other metrics impacts project productivity and quality. Finally, we'll demonstrate how data isn't just about numbers.
You can also tell a unique story using the power of data. Storytelling offers a memorable way to communicate important aspects of your project. Pairing storytelling with data can convince stakeholders of ways to resolve problems and ensure a successful outcome. So data certainly has its benefits. There's a lot to learn about data, and we'll lay out some of the basics so you can confidently tackle your projects.
Ready to get started? Let's get to it in the next video.
## The value of data
# The value of data Hi there! In this video, we'll explain the value of data and how it impacts your projects. We'll also cover how you'll use data to communicate with stakeholders. Data is a big business. There are 2.5 quintillion bytes of data created each day. That's a lot of data and a lot of information! Let's start by talking about what data is. Data is a collection of facts or information, and through data analysis, you'll learn how to use data to draw conclusions and make predictions and decisions.
We use data daily to help us make decisions and improve performance. For example, my friend is a runner who participates in annual five-kilometer and ten-kilometer runs. When she's training for a run, she uses the data on her GPS watch to measure her time and distance. She can even calculate her pace by measuring the minutes-per-kilometer. She uses the minutes-per-kilometer data to track her performance over time so that she can focus on improving for the future.
Similarly, companies use data and data analysis to improve and bring value to their organization in a variety of ways. For example, companies source data on customer behavior and customer demand to provide better services and create new products. Netflix is a great example of a company that uses data intelligence to predict what customers want. By observing data points surrounding types of genres, ratings, and number of repeated viewings, Netflix recommends TV shows that they believe customers might like, therefore improving the customer's viewing experience.
In the same way, as a project manager, you can use data daily to make better decisions, solve problems, understand performance, improve processes, and understand your users. Let's examine how these benefits can impact a project. Let's talk about how this can play out in our Plant Pals project at Office Green. If you have the data on customer buying patterns and identify that your best-selling products are all tropical plants, you'll be able to make better decisions when placing new plant orders with your supplier.
You'll also be able to better understand your users and their preferences to improve your offerings and performance. Another daily benefit of data within your project team is the opportunity to improve processes. If you have the data from your project tracker of the number of tasks completed, the number of escalations, or the number of issues that come up surrounding an internal process, you'll be able to deduce where the majority of issues are stemming from.
This data will help inform your decision on where to focus your attention to improve the process. While these are simple examples, through critical analysis, application, and execution, data becomes a powerful tool to guide any project in the right direction. Coming up, we'll discuss the types of project data you can use to do just that.
## Common types of project data
# Common types of project data Hi again. In the previous video, you learned about the value of data. In this lesson, we'll discuss the common types of data that project managers collect and analyze regularly. We'll also discuss the tools you'll need to organize this data for your projects. Ready to get started? Okay, let's go! As we discussed earlier, data is the collection of facts that can help inform decisions.
You may start to notice how the project data impacts the team's daily activities and the overall progress and the success of the project. This is done by using various types of metrics. A metric is a quantifiable measurement that is used to track and assess a business objective. Metrics are based on selected goals. They vary per project and serve as a key type of project data. There are many types of project data you can use to determine progress and efficiency.
You can group project metrics into productivity metrics and quality metrics. Productivity typically measures progress and output over time. Productivity metrics allow you to track the effectiveness and efficiency of your project and include metrics like milestones, tasks, projections, and duration. Let's break down each metric. As you may recall from an earlier course, a milestone is an important point within the project schedule that indicates progress and usually signifies completion of a deliverable or phase of the project.
And a project task is an activity that needs to be accomplished within a set period of time. A projection is how you predict an outcome based on the information you have now. For example, you can predict that with the resources you have at the start of the project, the project will be completed in six months. The duration of a project is the total time it takes to complete a project from start to finish.
Duration can also be used for milestones and determining if you'll meet project deadlines. This data is broken down into hours, days, weeks, months, and sometimes years. So to recap, productivity metrics include milestones, tasks, projections, and duration. Now let's discuss quality metrics. Quality metrics relates to achieving acceptable outcomes and can include metrics such as the number of changes, issues, and cost variance, which all affect quality.
Let's discuss each metric. The number of changes during the project or project scope helps to monitor risks. Changes show any inconsistencies from the initial requirements of the project. A series of compounding small changes may indicate a bigger issue and provide early warning signs of these issues. Using a change log to keep a record of these changes is a useful tool for communicating with stakeholders about why something is taking a long time or costs more than expected.
A change log is a record of all of the notable changes on a project. An issue is a known and real problem that may affect the ability to complete a task. For example, an issue might be the delay of legal approval for an advertisement you were hoping to launch or the missing number of confirmed seats to secure a venue for a business conference. Another quality metric is cost variance.
It illustrates the difference between the actual cost and the budget cost. Simply put, cost variance compares what you plan to spend versus what you actually spent. Let's put it in an example. If you budgeted to only host 250 attendees at an upcoming business conference but 275 people showed up and the venue charges you for those additional guests, the actual costs will be higher than your initial budget or estimate.
So to recap, quality metrics can include things like number of changes, issues, and cost variance. While these data points are commonly tracked by project managers, there are dozens more that you can leverage to inform decisions in your project. The great news is that there's a lot of sophisticated software and tools dedicated to project management and data analysis, so you'll have help keeping track of all of these different types of data in one centralized location.
Project management tools like Workfront and JIRA track activity and provide readable results so you can measure the overall health of your project. Data analysis tools like Tableau are useful for data visualization. Now you know a bit more about how to identify common types of data. You can also ID common project management software and tools that can help you manage and analyze data.
In the next lesson, we'll cover how data helps you to make informed decisions. Meet you there.
## Common data metrics for project management
Common data metrics for project management There are many types of project data you can use to determine your team’s progress and efficiency, evaluate the success of your project, and inform project decisions. While you don't need to be a data expert, knowing how to measure, track, and evaluate the right kind of data will help you deliver the most value and impact. This reading will recap some of the common types of data from the previous video and introduce a few more key data points that can help you manage projects and work with stakeholders.
This reading will also introduce a few ways to interpret the data so that you can reduce risks and make the right decisions about your teams and projects. The benefits of analyzing data in project management As a project manager, you can use data daily to make better decisions, solve problems, improve performance and processes, and understand your users. For example, if you have data on customer buying patterns, you can identify your best-selling products, and you'll be able to make smarter decisions when placing new product orders with your suppliers.
This data will also help you better understand your users and their preferences so you can improve your product offerings and performance. You can also use project team data to help you refine your processes. For example, if your team is experiencing an issue, analyzing data from your project tracker about the number of tasks completed, escalations, or internal process problems can help you find the source.
This will allow you to make an informed decision about where to focus your efforts to improve processes. Through critical analysis, application, and execution, data becomes a powerful tool to guide any project in the right direction. Data, metrics, and analytics Three images: Numbers grouped in a circle to represent data; a graph with rulers lining the x and y axis to represent metrics; two people working on a puzzle to represent analytics.
Data is information. It’s the numbers and feedback available to you about different aspects of your project. Metrics are how you measure your data. They define the important or specific information (data) you need to know about your project, such as productivity, quality, or engagement. Once you determine your project's metrics, you analyze the data according to those metrics to find patterns and answer questions about your project.
This process is called analytics: using data to answer questions, discover relationships, and predict unknown outcomes. When analyzing data, ask: What do the metrics mean to you? How do you want to use the metrics you've chosen? Can you find patterns to make predictions about your project? Can you find ways to improve—or optimize—certain aspects of your project? What lessons can you draw from your project's data?
The next few sections are some common categories of metrics used in project management and a brief explanation of what they are and how they're useful to a project. Keep in mind that your use of different metrics isn’t limited to these categories. All of your project data is interrelated. The same metric can also provide different information when applied to different aspects of your project.
Productivity metrics Productivity metrics typically measure progress and output over time. They allow you to track—or predict—the effectiveness and efficiency of your project team. To track your team's productivity over time, analyze the number of tasks or milestones completed in a given time frame. Ask questions like, what percentage of tasks are completed on time, and how long do they usually take?
Or, if tasks were not completed on time, how much longer than anticipated did it take to complete all the tasks? On-time completion rates can help illustrate to clients and stakeholders how the project is progressing and when they can expect certain deliverables to be ready. If your project's completion rates are high, it means you're doing a good job of meeting your completion goals.
If the rates are low, it means you're missing deadlines. Analyzing data can help you make decisions about things like improving or implementing new processes, or re-evaluating how you estimate project scope, complexity, and timeline. Calculating duration (how long something takes) can be useful for setting and evaluating tasks and milestones and determining if you'll meet project deadlines.
Tracking task duration can improve the accuracy of estimating a project's timeline. This data is broken down into hours, days, weeks, months, and sometimes years. You can also analyze current information to predict future outcomes and make projections (or forecasts) about productivity trends, project durations, costs, performance or quality. This kind of data empowers you to proactively manage your project and its resources and measure the accuracy of your projections over time.
For example, analyzing your team's overall performance or velocity can answer questions such as, is the team completing its tasks and milestones? What percentage of tasks is the team finishing on time? Predicting the future may be impossible, but building a better understanding of it and refining your method for making projections is achievable and valuable. Quality metrics Quality metrics relate to achieving acceptable outcomes and can include metrics such as number of changes, issues, and cost variance, all of which affect quality.
Changes refer to differences in any aspect of the project from what was originally planned or required. Issues are problems that may affect task completion—and often result in a change. Track the number of changes and issues to identify patterns, refine processes, and share information about the project with stakeholders. Cost or budget variance is the difference between the actual amount of money spent on a project and the amount that was budgeted for the project.
Over time, this data can help you understand how well you're estimating budgets for your projects. A low variance means you've estimated your project budget accurately. A high variance means you should reevaluate your estimation process. You could be under- or over-estimating costs for your budget, or you may not be tracking expenses effectively. Happiness and satisfaction Project managers at Google use a sub-set of metrics called happiness metrics that also relate to quality.
These are metrics that relate to different aspects of the user's overall satisfaction with a product or service, like visual appeal, how likely they are to recommend, and ease of use. Happiness metrics can generally be captured with a well-designed survey or by tracking revenue generated, customer retention, or product returns. Customer satisfaction scores reflect user attitudes, satisfaction, or perceived ease of use.
These scores measure how well the project delivered what it set out to do and how well it satisfies customer and stakeholder needs. Customer satisfaction scores generally represent a combined metric—the sum of several different happiness metrics. For example, on a satisfaction survey, a customer might separately rate a product's appearance as 6/10, ease of use as 7/10, and likeness to recommend or use again as 8/10.
The overall customer satisfaction score would then be 7/10. You will need to determine what scores are acceptable for your project by discussing with stakeholders what the most important aspects of the project are. Adoption and engagement Another set of metrics related to quality are adoption and engagement. Adoption refers to whether or not a product, service or process is accepted and used.
Engagement refers to the degree to which it is used—the frequency of use, amount of time spent using it, and the range of use. It might help to think of these in terms of throwing a party: your adoption metrics would reveal to you whether or not people accepted the invitation and showed up. The engagement metrics would tell you how active they were at the party—whether they participated in activities or interacted with other attendees, if they invited their friends to come with them, and how long they stayed.
Adoption metrics for a product or service release, like an app, software program, delivery service, or gym membership, would be similar to the party example. However, they can be a bit more complex if you need to track metrics for more than one thing, like whether users make additional purchases or sign up for premium features. Each project will need to define its own set of successful adoption metrics, such as: - Conversion rates - Time to value (TTV) - Onboarding completion rates - Frequency of purchases - Providing feedback (rating the product or service) - Completing a profile Engagement metrics tell you to what degree a product, service, or process is being used.
They reveal the frequency and type of customer interaction and participation over time. Engagement metrics might include the daily usage rate of a design feature or tracking orders and customer interactions. As a project manager, you're not only concerned with the end user's level of engagement. It's just as important to monitor stakeholder and team member engagement as well. Measuring stakeholder participation by tracking the frequency of communication, responses to emails or updates, attendance at meetings, or level of input can give you a sense of whether or not stakeholders are finding value in the project.
A lack of meaningful engagement could put your project at risk. Stakeholders may not be aware of changes or the overall progress of the project, and therefore the final outcome of the project may not meet their expectations. Measuring team member engagement is vital to the success of your project because the more engaged they are, the more productive they are, and the more likely they are to produce high-quality results.
Ideally, you want your adoption and engagement metrics to increase or to at least meet the goal metrics that were established with stakeholders earlier in the project. If there is no increase, or the metrics drop, then your rates are low and therefore not as successful. Check out the resources below for a more in-depth understanding of how and why to measure adoption and engagement.
Key takeaway Data, metrics and analytics are all important to the success of your project. You'll need to have some familiarity with how to collect and measure data, and how to use the data to tell you about different aspects of your project. Depending on the project and its unique goals, some metrics will be more important than others. It's your job to make sure you understand which metrics your stakeholders are most interested in and what elements impact your team's ability to deliver quality results on time and within budget.
Want to learn more? Check out the following resources: A Comprehensive Guide To Project Management Metrics Project Analytics: Benefits, Challenges and First Steps Project Analytics to Improve Project and Portfolio Decision Making Project Management Metrics Productivity Metrics: Why They’re Important & 4 Examples
## Discerning important data
# Discerning important data Welcome back. Let's get back to discussing all things data. Earlier, we learned about what data is, its value to the project manager, and the different types of data a project manager works with. In this lesson, we'll discuss how to identify the most important data for your project, how to prioritize the data you collect, and how to effectively gather priorities from your stakeholders so that you're meeting your goals.
Let's get started. Did you know that the average temperature for most humans is 98.6 degrees? So if your temperature reached 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit or higher, there would likely be signals that something's not quite right, like a sweaty forehead, muscle aches, or even dehydration. Your brain would begin to receive signals that something is off because it's the brain's job to pay attention to the signals that indicate there's a problem threatening your overall health.
That's how you should think about data when it comes to managing your project. There are all kinds of information and facts that you can gather as a project manager, but it's important for you to be aware of the signals that threaten the overall success of the project. A signal is an observable change, and it can help you to determine the overall health of your project and identify early signs that something isn't quite right.
Being aware of the different types of data you have access to and knowing which signals to respond to are key to deciding what data is most important. Maybe you're asking yourself, "How do I determine what data is important?" Great question. As a project manager, it's up to you to look for signals and to prioritize data to deliver positive results. There are a couple of ways you can begin to do this.
One way is to observe your team's productivity and output. Identify which tasks contribute most to the overall goal. This will help you determine the importance of which data points—in this case, tasks and activities—you should focus on. Secondly, prioritize the data or metrics that are most valuable to stakeholders. For example, let's say you have an ongoing project at a manufacturing company to release a portable home appliance by the third quarter.
Your stakeholder is concerned about whether or not you'll meet the deadline. Okay, start by thinking, what data do you have about the project? You know that it's the first quarter and you're already $2,000 over budget. But you also know that you're 30 days ahead of schedule according to your burndown chart, which measures time against the amount of work done and the amount of work remaining.
You may think your project is running as scheduled, but there are additional things to consider. For one, the number of tasks has increased by ten percent over the last three weeks because your stakeholders want to add more features to the appliance. And now your team's productivity is slowing down because they're starting to burn out from the late nights and long hours required to add in those new features.
Now how do you feel about meeting that third quarter deadline? Not so good, right? What do you do? You might be tempted to focus on the signal that you're $2,000 over budget, but if your stakeholders communicated that they're more concerned with meeting the deadline than they were about being over budget, then you'll want to keep an eye on key signals related to time and scope rather than budget, and then hone in on those signals to identify and prioritize areas to improve.
The relevant data tells you you'll be able to meet the deadline, provided that stakeholders stop requesting new product features that result in more tasks for your team to complete. You can use your productivity metrics to forecast how you'll manage an increase in scope with your team's current productivity rate and communicate this to your stakeholder. To avoid having to reset expectations with stakeholders again and again, you can keep your project plan up to date with the project's priorities and ensure that this information is accessible to everyone.
Stakeholders can look to your project plan for a high-level overview of answers to important questions, success criteria, artifacts, and the overall health of your project. Remember, there are a lot of data points available to you. Using signals, focusing on the tasks that have the biggest impact on the project goal, and aligning to your stakeholders' priorities are a good way to help you prioritize the right tasks.
Now that you identified data and prioritized it so that you're working to meet business needs, the next thing to determine is how to use the data to make better decisions. We'll cover that when we connect in the next video.
## Data ethics considerations
Data ethics considerations In the previous video, you learned how to use knowledge to discern data and how signals help prioritize data. This reading will cover the importance of data ethics and two key principles: data privacy and data bias. Data ethics As a project manager, data collection and analysis will be a key part of your projects. As you’ve learned, you’ll collect data from a variety of sources, including focus groups, interviews and questionnaires.
The data you collect will usually hold PII (personally identifiable information)—information that could be used to directly identify, contact, or locate an individual. A lot of times, you will also need to report on the data you collect to stakeholders, customers, and your project team. Collecting, analyzing, and sharing this data in an ethical way is extremely important for maintaining the integrity of your organization, your projects, and your position.
Data ethics is the study and evaluation of moral challenges related to data collection and analysis. This includes generating, recording, curating, processing, sharing, and using data in order to come up with ethical solutions. Businesses apply data ethics practices so they can: - Comply with regulations - Show that they are trustworthy - Ensure fair and reasonable data usage - Minimize biases - Develop a positive public perception Data ethics is rooted in several principles.
In this reading, we will focus on two of these principles: data privacy and data bias. Data privacy Data privacy is a key part of data ethics. Data privacy deals with the proper handling of data. This includes the purpose of data collection and processing, privacy preferences, the way organizations manage personal data, and the rights of individuals. It focuses on making sure the ways we collect, process, share, archive, and delete data are all in accordance with the law.
As a project manager, it is your responsibility to protect the data you collect. You can help ensure the privacy of data collected from users, stakeholders, and others for your projects by: - Increasing data privacy awareness. Make sure every member of your project team—plus the vendors, contractors, and other stakeholders from outside of your company—are made aware of your organization's data security and privacy protocols.
- Using security tools. Free security tools, like encrypted storage solutions and password managers, can decrease your project’s vulnerability to a data breach. In a lot of applications, like ones that are part of Google Workspace and Microsoft OneDrive, privacy settings can be adjusted to only give access to specific individuals. - Anonymizing data. Data anonymization refers to one or more techniques such as blanking, hashing, or masking personal and identifying information to protect the identities of people included in the data.
This helps protect individuals’ personal information by keeping them anonymous. Once the information has been anonymized, it can then be used and shared freely. Types of data that should be anonymized include names, telephone numbers, social security numbers, email addresses, photographs, and account numbers. Data bias Another important data ethics practice is making sure that the data you collect does not indicate any biases.
Data bias is a type of error that tends to skew results in a certain direction. Maybe the questions on your survey had a particular slant to influence answers, or maybe your sample group was not fully representative of the population you want to study. Bias can also happen if a sample group lacks inclusivity. For example, if your sample does not include people with disabilities. The way you collect data can also bias a dataset.
Say you give people only a short time to answer questions, this can lead to rushed responses. When people are rushed, they tend to make more mistakes, which can affect the quality of their data and create biased outcomes. As a project manager, you have to think about bias and fairness from the moment you start collecting data to the time you present your conclusions. Types of biases There are different types of biases to keep in mind when setting up your data collection processes.
Here are four of the most common types of biases that could impact your data: - Sampling bias is when a sample is not representative of the population as a whole. For example, maybe your sample did not include people above the age of 65. Or maybe you excluded people from certain socioeconomic groups. - Observer bias is the tendency for different people to observe things differently.
For example, stakeholders from different parts of the world might view the same data differently and draw different conclusions from it. - Interpretation bias is the tendency to always interpret situations that don’t have obvious answers in a strictly positive or negative way, when, in fact there is more than one way to understand the data. Data that does not provide an obvious set of conclusions makes some people feel anxious, which can lead to interpretation bias.
For example, a team member might interpret inconclusive survey results negatively, while other team members might be able to think more carefully and assess the data from different angles. - Confirmation bias is the tendency to search for or interpret information in a way that confirms pre-existing beliefs. For example, you might ask only specific stakeholders for feedback on parts of your project because you know they are the most likely to have the same perspective as you.
Each of these types of bias affect the way you collect and make sense of the data, so it is important to be aware of them when setting up your data collection processes. Key takeaway According to the Project Management Institute’s Code of Ethics & Professional Conduct, “Ethics is about making the best possible decisions concerning people, resources, and the environment. Ethical choices diminish risk, advance positive results, increase trust, determine long term success, and build reputations.
Leadership is absolutely dependent on ethical choices." A key way you can show your leadership skills is by exercising sound judgment when it comes to data ethics. In order to tell a project’s data-informed story to stakeholders, project team members, and others in an ethical way, you have to make sure you think about both privacy and bias-related concerns in how you conduct, analyze, and share that data.
## Using data analysis to inform decisions
# Using data analysis to inform decisions Hi again! In this video, we'll go into data analysis and how project managers use it to make informed decisions throughout a project. We use data every day to help us make both simple and important decisions in our lives. For example, imagine that you're saving money for a big purchase. Maybe you decided that the best way to reach your goal sooner is to create a budget.
After spending time reviewing your budget, perhaps you find that your weekly expenses are higher than your weekly allowances and that many of your expenses are from ordering food and dining out. You realize that in order for you to reach your goal, you'll need to start spending less money on eating out and find more cost-effective ways to buy food. With this new information, you've found a way to save up for your big purchase.
Similar to how you might create an adjusted budget to reach a desired outcome, it's your role as a project manager to select appropriate data to help inform your decision-making. You can do this using a process called data analysis. Data analysis is the process of collecting and organizing information to help draw conclusions. It's used to solve problems, make informed decisions, and support goals.
Businesses use data analysis to reveal important insights and patterns within their data that help inform actions and drive results. Gathering data is only part of the process. The other part is analyzing the data. What you learn from your analysis becomes knowledge that powers smart solutions for your project. Project managers will often apply data analysis to look for repeated behaviors and to find a solution based on data predictions.
For example, let's imagine that a ride-share company has a group of data analysts working on using patterns in rider behavior to improve customer support. They noticed a high demand for drivers midweek during rush hour in one specific city. As a result, riders are having a hard time getting drivers to pick them up during peak hours. As a project manager, you've been asked to come up with a solution to help meet the increased demand for drivers.
You work with your team to determine which data points would be most appropriate to review. You might decide to track peak traffic times, the number of average daily rider requests, and the number of available drivers. These data points can help inform how to solve for the high demand during rush hour. After analyzing the data, your team realizes that one solution could be to offer incentives to drivers to pick up riders in the city during peak times.
The new incentives make drivers feel appreciated, and the increase in drivers increases customer satisfaction. And you came to this solution thanks to the insights gleaned from data analysis. In this example, you collected types of data: qualitative and quantitative. Quantitative data includes statistical and numerical facts about the number of rider requests that came in. Requests in the city increased at specific points over a period of time.
The other data is qualitative data, which describes the subjective qualities or things that can't be measured with numerical data, like user feedback about the service or product. In project management, you will use both qualitative data and quantitative data points to inform decisions, make improvements, and share insights. Coming up, you'll learn how to tell stories using data and effective ways to present.
Meet you there.
## The six steps of data analysis
The six steps of data analysis In an earlier video, you learned that data analysis is the process of collecting and organizing information to help draw conclusions, solve problems, make informed decisions, and support your goals. In this reading, we will go over the key parts of the data analysis process. There are six main steps involved in data analysis: Ask, prepare, process, analyze, share and act.
Let’s break these down one by one. During the Ask phase, ask key questions to help frame your analysis, starting with: What is the problem? When defining the problem, look at the current state of the business and identify how it is different from the ideal state. Usually, there is an obstacle in the way or something wrong that needs to be fixed. At this stage, you want to be as specific as possible.
You also want to stay focused on the problem itself, not just the symptoms. For example, imagine you are doing data analysis for a gym that is losing memberships. You could ask: Why do we keep losing members? But a better and more specific question would be: What factors are negatively impacting the member experience? That way, when you set off to do your research, you know exactly what to look for.
Another part of the Ask stage is identifying your stakeholders and understanding their expectations. There can be lots of stakeholders on a project, and each of them can make decisions, influence actions, and weigh in on strategies. Each stakeholder will also have specific goals they want to meet. It is pretty common for a stakeholder to come to you with a problem that needs solving.
But before you begin your analysis, you need to be clear about what they are asking of you. For example, if your manager assigns you a project related to analyzing the gym’s business risk, it would be a good idea to confirm whether they want you to analyze all types of risks that could affect the gym or just risks related to weather or seasonal trends. After you have a clear direction, it is time to move to the Prepare stage.
This is where you collect and store the data you will use for the upcoming analysis process. Let’s turn back to our gym membership example. To collect data on the member experience, you decide to send surveys to the gym’s members asking for feedback about their experience. To make sure you get specific answers, you ask them to offer feedback in three distinct categories: upkeep of the facility, customer service, and membership cost.
You also leave room for them to write in a response. When you get the member surveys back, it is important that you have an organized system for tracking and filing them. This stage is when it is time to Process your data. In this step, you will “clean” your data, which means you will enter your data into a spreadsheet, or another tool of your choice, and eliminate any inconsistencies and inaccuracies that can get in the way of results.
While collecting data, be sure to get rid of any duplicate responses or biased data. This helps you know that any decisions made from the analysis are based on facts and that they are fair and unbiased. For example, if you noticed duplicate responses from a single gym member when sorting through the surveys, you would need to get rid of the copies to be sure your data set is accurate.
During this stage, it is also important to check the data you prepared to make sure it is complete and correct and that there are no typos or other errors. Now it is time to Analyze. In this stage, you take a close look at your data to draw conclusions, make predictions, and decide on next steps. Here, you will transform and organize the data in a way that highlights the full scope of the results so you can figure out what it all means.
You can create visualizations using charts and graphs to determine if there are any trends or patterns within the data or any need for additional research. In our gym membership example, let’s say you notice 50% of the members wrote in an additional response on the survey citing that the equipment is outdated. The survey also showed that 75% of the responses cited “expensive membership fees.” When looking at the 50% of responses citing “outdated equipment” and 75% of responses citing “expensive membership fees” side by side on a graph, you may be able to deduce that these responses inform one another.
Members feel like the experience just isn’t worth the price. You might conclude that the gym should invest in new equipment if they want to keep members and add value to the membership fee. Once you have asked questions to figure out the problem—then prepared, processed, and analyzed the data—it is time to Share your findings. In this stage, you use data visualization to organize your data in a format that is clear and digestible for your audience.
When sharing, you can offer the insights you gained during your analysis to help stakeholders make effective, data-driven decisions for solving the problem. And finally, you are ready to Act! In the final stage of your data analysis, the business takes all of the insights you have provided and puts them into action to solve the original business problem. Conducting a data analysis is an essential process for understanding a business’ needs and challenges and determining effective solutions.
These six foundational steps—ask, prepare, process, analyze, share, and act—will help set you up for success!
## Presenting data to tell a project's story
# Presenting data to tell a project's story Welcome back. In this video, we'll discuss how to tell a powerful story using data. We'll teach you how to gather and organize your project data to present it to others within your organization. Presenting is a powerful way to communicate your ideas and support your decisions throughout the project journey. Think of presenting as telling the story of your project.
Storytelling is the process of turning facts into narrative to communicate something to your audience. Storytelling is how you bring data to life and is a useful way to tell stakeholders within your organization about your project. In a way, we're all storytellers using information and experiences to share ideas with others. Stories usually have a beginning, middle, and end. To tell a great story using data, we'll go over some best practices to make sure your story is complete, accurate, and compelling.
In general, there are six main steps to storytelling. First, define your audience. Then, collect the data. Next, filter and analyze the data. Fourth, choose a visual representation. Then, shape the story. And finally, gather your feedback. Now let's review each one. Step 1: define your audience. In this first step, it's important to know who you're presenting to. Are you presenting to project sponsors or executives?
Or to team members? Define your audience and find out what matters most to them. Begin by asking yourself qualifying questions like: What would my audience want to know about the project? Or, what are their most urgent concerns? Which key data points influence the story and project outcome? This will set you up to know the type of story you want to tell and the type of data you should use to tell it.
For example, years ago, I was working on a project for Google Maps. Our goal was to apply a label to every business in the world: restaurants, hotels, gas stations—you name it. There are many, many, many businesses in the world, and I only had a small team of engineers to work with. For this project, we tailored our storytelling to an audience of vice presidents from Google Maps and Google Search.
Both were important to consider, because we were helping users find and connect to businesses through the Google Maps app and through Google Search. I'll return to this example as I take you through the steps of storytelling. Next step is Step 2: Find the data that connects to the question you want to answer. You'll need to begin searching for data from trustworthy resources to support the point you're trying to make.
Leverage the relevant project resources in documents like your project plan or work management software to download and analyze key data points. For my Google Maps project, the question we were trying to answer was: Where should we focus our attention first? So to find the right data for this question, we turned to the many businesses in our internal database and the available information about what types of businesses users were searching for.
That brings us to Step 3: Filter and analyze the data. Now that you've collected your data, you'll need to vet it for credibility and filter the information. For my Maps project, we used search queries to determine the types of businesses that users searched for most often, which included restaurants, cafes, and hotels. There were other categories—gas stations, museums, etc.—but they collectively made up a much smaller percentage of geo-specific search traffic.
Step 4: Choose a visual representation. Visualizations are a great way to help people remember the information you're presenting and are an essential piece of storytelling. You can use data in different ways to tell a story, like using dashboards, charts, infographics, and mappings, and we'll go over these examples in more detail in the next video. For my Maps project, we decided on a pie chart to help tell our story, which brings me to Step 5: Shape the story.
After you've analyzed your data and know how you'd like to visualize it, it's time to tie it all together into one cohesive narrative. Take some time to think about what you're hoping to achieve, the points you want to make, and the questions and concerns you want to answer. For the Maps project, we used the pie chart to show that most geo-specific search queries are covered by a relatively small number of businesses.
So we built a story about that data. We wanted agreement from our VPs to work on improving the data behind this set of categories in a few major markets. It needed to illustrate that if we improved the category data, we'd succeed in improving the search results for more than 50% of geo searches. Lastly is Step 6: Gather your feedback. Similar to how you may ask a friend to practice with you before an interview, you want to be sure that before you present, you do a trial run.
Try getting feedback from someone who's not connected to the project. Find out if it was interesting. Did it make sense? What questions did they have? Their feedback can help you identify areas of your story that were unclear or unmemorable and give you a final chance to make adjustments. To recap, you want to define your audience, collect the data, filter and analyze the data, choose a visual representation, shape the story, and finally, gather your feedback.
The key to effective storytelling is to be organized, intentional, and prepared. Coming up, we'll talk more about Step 4: effective visualization. See you there.
## Data visualization tools
# Data visualization tools Hi there. In this video, we'll discuss data visualization and how it helps inform decisions for your project. Data visualization is the graphical representation of information to facilitate understanding. That can include graphs, maps, and tables, to name a few. Project managers use these visual representations for a few reasons. They're useful for communicating data to others because they help filter information by focusing the audience on the most important data points and insights.
Visualizations are also a more efficient way to summarize information because they condense long ideas and facts into a single image or representation, and crucially, they help the viewer make sense of and remember the information being presented. Visualizations help aid information processing and enhance memory. It plays an active role in the storytelling process by helping communicate project insights to your audience.
Let's go into some familiar types of data visualizations that project managers use throughout the entire life cycle of the project. First, let's discuss a common data visualization tool used when running the project: a dashboard. A dashboard is a type of user interface, typically a graph or summary chart, that provides a snapshot view of your project's progress or performance. It acts as a centralized location for project stakeholders to draw quick insights.
It can display a tight summary of metrics, stats, and key performance indicators, or KPIs. A KPI is a measurable value or metric that demonstrates how effective an organization is at achieving key objectives. They serve as a great aid in helping your team and stakeholders understand if you're on the right track. In other words, they signal if you're making progress to reach your success criteria.
In your dashboard, you may have a summary of your top KPIs or metrics and your progress to date. For instance, if one of your objectives is for your project to reach a 95% customer satisfaction score at the end of a three-month period, you may track that goal via thousands of customer satisfaction surveys. Rather than displaying a spreadsheet of each response, a dashboard is a good place to summarize those results and showcase the average customer satisfaction score to see how you are pacing to your goal.
Similarly, you could also include other key KPIs that signify progress, like a countdown that shows the number of days until project launch or the percentage of the number of issues resolved. Many project dashboards may also summarize project plans, documents, and reports in one place and provide a visual of the status of each of them. For example, if your project plan has hundreds of tasks with varying degrees of completion, your dashboard may summarize the amount of tasks or milestones completed at that point in time and the percentage of tasks that are in progress, complete, or not started.
As you may start to notice, dashboards are great visualizations for efficient status updates because they enable you to group, summarize, and highlight top project data points. Another visualization that does this is one that we mentioned earlier: a burndown chart. A burndown chart is a line chart that measures the time against the amount of work done and the amount of work remaining.
The outstanding work is usually on the vertical axis, with the time visualized horizontally. This serves as a strong visualization to help the team picture the amount of tasks left to complete. Similar to line charts, column charts are another popular graph used to signal project performance and progress. Column charts are useful for comparing different activities or comparing progress over time.
For instance, you can show different outputs, like the number of customers and the number of plants delivered, year-over-year, to demonstrate growth in change. Pie charts are useful when showing the composition of something or the parts-to-whole relationship. All of these simple charts offer visualizations that enable you to draw quick insights and help tell stories. There are many more in the following reading that I recommend checking out and practicing.
Before that, there is a final visual tool that I want you to know about, which is an infographic. Infographics are visual representations of information, such as data or facts, and are typically in the form of what we call at Google a "one-pager" or a "one-sheeter." The difference is that they're typically concise summaries of that data. This is often done primarily through graphics or drawings, emphasizing the biggest points with added text for further explanation.
Use infographics to present complex information quickly, professionally, and clearly, especially when you may not be present to share all the details yourself. Infographics should be able to communicate strong information without the need for extra support and explanation. These are just a few examples of data visualization in project management. Remember, you'll want to use visuals to demonstrate and illustrate situations like changes over time, frequency, relationship correlations, and to analyze value and risks.
Another important tip is to make sure that these visualizations are accessible. As we mentioned before, you'll want to ensure that your data story is understood by everyone. Check out the resources tab on some of the best practices for accessible visualizations and communications. Nice job! Now that you're noticing how to use data to effectively tell your story, we'll continue on to the final piece of this lesson: learning about presentation techniques to present your data.
Meet you in the next video.
## Different ways to visualize data
Different ways to visualize data Earlier, we discussed best practices for collecting and analyzing data. When it is time to present your data to your audience, you don’t just want to tell them about your findings and what they mean, you want to show them. Data visualization helps us organize data and turn it into information that is clear and easy for our audience to digest. In this reading, we will go over a variety of charts and graphs you can use to visually represent data.
Visualizing your data Before translating your data into a chart or graph, you should be clear on what you want to show your audience. Figure out what data you want to use and why. You might want to inform your audience about a new trend or a valuable piece of information, or show relationships between data sets. Or maybe you need to compare values, understand the composition of something, or analyze trends and behaviors over set periods of time.
The type of data you have, and the information you want to show or understand, will help you figure out the right data visualization to use. Let's go over some scenarios and discuss which charts and graphs would be best for each. Show relationships A scatter plot, sometimes referred to as a scatter chart or scatter graph, uses dots to represent values for two different variables.
The position of each dot on the horizontal and vertical axis indicates values for an individual data point. Scatter plots will sometimes have a line drawn across its center. This line is known as the trend line and highlights the direction the points are trending towards. Scatter plots show the relationship between data sets, and can help us understand the impact of one factor on another.
For example, the scatterplot below shows the relationship between the life expectancy of people living in a country and how happy those people are. The first variable, the happiness score, is reflected on the vertical axis —also called the y-axis. The second variable, life expectancy, is on the horizontal axis —also called the x-axis. By looking at this scatterplot, we can tell that as a person’s happiness score increases, so does their life expectancy.
Scatter plot best practices: - Start the y-axis at 0 to represent data accurately. Comparing values Bar graphs use size contrast to compare two or more values. In the example below, the time of day is compared to someone’s level of motivation throughout the whole work day. By comparing this data, we can tell that this person’s motivation is low at the beginning of the work day, and gets higher and higher by the end.
Bar graphs are also a great way to clarify trends and identify patterns. Bar graph best practices: - Use consistent colors throughout the chart - Use accent colors to highlight important data points or changes over time - Use horizontal labels so it is easier to read Demonstrating composition Now let’s check out another visualization you will probably recognize—the pie chart. Pie charts show us the composition of something.
In other words, how much each part of something makes up the whole. The pie chart below shows us all the activities that make up someone’s day. Half of it is spent working, which is shown by the amount of space that the blue section takes up. From a quick glance at this pie chart, you can easily tell which activities make up a good chunk of the day and which ones take up less time.
Pie chart best practices: - Avoid including too many categories so it is easy to compare slices - Make sure that the slice values add up to 100% - Order slices according to their size Analyzing trends and behaviors Tracking trends can help us understand shifts or changes in our data. Line graphs are a great tool for visually showing change over time, but they can be paired with other factors, too. In the line graph below, we are using two lines to compare the popularity of cats and dogs over a period of time.
Because the graph is using two different line colors, we can instantly tell that dogs are more popular than cats. We will talk more about using colors and patterns to make visualizations more accessible to audiences later, too. Even as the lines move up and down, there is a general trend upwards, and the line for dogs always stays higher than the line for cats. Line graph best practices: - To avoid clutter, don't show more than four categories.
- Organize highly variable data at the top of the chart to make it easy to read Scatterplots, bar graphs, pie charts, and line graphs are common data visualizations you will use throughout your career as a project manager. To practice creating these charts, check out this step-by-step overview for creating charts using Google Sheets or this resource for Microsoft Excel.
## Effective presentation techniques
# Effective presentation techniques Hi. You've learned the process of crafting a narrative about your project, and you've learned how to visualize key data points that help you to tell that story. Now it's time to bring it all together. In this video, we'll highlight some useful presentation techniques. Think about one of your favorite public speakers and why you enjoy their presentations so much.
Is it their voice, their knowledge, or the confidence they exude while speaking? Brene Brown is one of my favorite speakers. She's widely known for her 2010 TED Talk, The Power of Vulnerability, which received 60 million views worldwide. Brown didn't begin her career as a public speaker, but as a research professor at the University of Houston. Today, she uses public speaking as a way to teach executives and leaders about courage and empathy.
Public speakers spend a lot of time working on their craft. Speaking to an audience—whether to inform, entertain, or share—isn't always easy, and data alone isn't enough to convince people that you've made the right decisions or that your project was impactful. An effective presentation helps convey the important work that you and your team are accomplishing on your project. And throughout the project, you'll likely have many opportunities to present—from your initial kickoff meeting to your weekly status updates to your final project presentation.
As you begin to craft your narrative, think about your audience. Ask yourself: What do I want my audience to know, think, or do as a result of this presentation? Create your presentation around the big picture, and keep it simple. Now let's discuss three ways to help you give an effective presentation. Those are being precise, flexible, and memorable. First, to give an effective presentation, you need to be precise about your key points.
Identify the problem you're solving for your audience and remove any content that dilutes your narrative. One way I ensure that my slideshow presentations are as precise as they can be is by using a technique called "designing for five seconds." The idea is that your audience should be able to understand a slide within five seconds. So I keep my presentation slides simple, including only the most relevant data points, to avoid overloading my audience with text they don't have time to read.
To give an effective presentation, you also need to be flexible. Flexibility is a huge part of your job as a project manager. For example, it's possible that a stakeholder may have to leave your presentation unexpectedly or that other attendees may arrive late. Consider the approach you'd take if you had to shorten your presentation from an hour to 30 minutes, or even just five. Know the most important points you want to make, and be prepared to share only those points, should the unexpected occur.
Preparing ahead of time also helps you be more flexible when presenting. Ample preparation helps you to avoid small mistakes that can potentially distract from your narrative, like stumbling over sentences or struggling to pull up a slideshow presentation. To prepare ahead of time, you might practice delivering your presentation to members of your team and invite them to offer feedback, ask questions, or share concerns.
Preparing ahead of time also gives you space to identify and come up with answers to the types of questions your audience might have about your presentation. It also gives you time to imagine and prepare for possible objections your audience might have to the decisions you want to make. Lastly, be memorable. Develop a strategy that helps make your narrative unforgettable. Think back to effective storytelling.
This is the point where you want to tie in your data analysis, effective visualization, and put the finishing touches on your narrative to bring it all together. Use stories or include repetition to help your audience remember the information moving forward. Another helpful tip is to be aware of your body language when presenting. Maintain an upright posture and rest your hands at your side.
When making a point, try elevating your tone of voice for emphasis. Pace yourself by using intentional pauses and speak about half the speed you would normally speak while keeping your sentences short. Make eye contact with your audience and keep your facial expressions warm and friendly. Finally, have confidence. You've done the research and are well-prepared, you can set your worries aside.
If you're precise, flexible, and memorable, you'll give a great presentation. Now that you've analyzed the data and crafted your story, your job is to present your findings effectively. Use these tips to deliver a presentation worthy of a standing ovation. In the next video, we'll wrap up and review what we've recently learned. I'll meet you over there.
## Preparing an effective presentation
Preparing an effective presentation At various points throughout a project, you will likely be required to deliver a presentation to team members, key stakeholders, senior leaders, or customers. Use the following tips and best practices to help you prepare an effective presentation. Preparation Get clear on your goals and the purpose of your presentation. Be clear and specific about what you want to get out of the meeting, then frame the discussion with that goal in mind.
For instance, “We need two engineers who have worked in this industry before,” instead of “We need more resources.” Seek input and set expectations. Ask your manager or check with stakeholders regarding your presentation goals. Get their input and feedback ahead of time. - If you were invited to present, make sure you understand in advance exactly what the requestor is hoping to gain from your presentation.
Create a delivery plan. Identify a headline for each slide, which is the one-sentence main point that you are trying to illustrate with that slide. - Create a couple of supporting points that add interest to the headline, such as anecdotes, charts, data, etc. - Build in signposts. These are ways to clue the audience in to where you are going and what to expect with your presentation.
- Limit the number of slides in the main presentation. At the same time, consider creating backup slides for potential challenges, difficult questions, trade-offs, or alternative solutions. You can hide these backup slides at the end of your presentation if you don’t need them, or add them into your presentation if you do. Be mindful of your audience’s time. Invite only participants who need to be there.
- Send the presentation ahead of time, if possible. Develop a strategy for making your presentation memorable. Use stories and repeat key points. - Start with a strong intro. Spend extra prep time on the beginning. The beginning is when your nerves are typically the highest, and delivering the introduction successfully can help you quickly gain confidence. Practice Guide your audience through your presentation.
Help them notice what you notice, and transition between slides by using phrases like “Building on this point . . .” or “As I mentioned before . . .” Do a mock presentation with your team. If there will be more than one presenter, coordinate what each person will cover and how you will manage handoffs. - Practice a question-and-answer (Q&A) session, anticipating the kinds of questions your participants might ask so you are prepared with a quick and confident response.
In addition, practice what you will say if you are asked a question that you don’t know the answer to. - Be prepared to run the whole meeting yourself. If a co-presenter fails to show up, are you prepared to step in? Schedule time to practice. - Once you’ve outlined what you want to say, practice it—ideally in front of a mirror—or record yourself. This may help you identify awkward phrasing that could be improved and other issues.
Be prepared for surprises. Show that you can adapt and that you know your subject matter. - If time runs short, can you quickly summarize the key points? - Can you pivot the content according to what is most important to your audience? Presentation and pace Get right to the point. Identify what problem you are solving and state it up front. - Tell the audience why you are in the room with them and what you will be covering.
- Lay down the ground rules. For example, how do you want to handle questions and comments? Will you take them throughout your presentation or afterwards? Check your pace. Be mindful of clues from your audience and adjust accordingly. Follow up - If appropriate, send a follow up email with summary notes, action items, and time frames. - Debrief with your manager or key audience members on what they heard from the presentation.
Ask them what went well and what could have gone better. - Review next steps.
## Making presentations accessible
# Making presentations accessible Hello again. You just learned a lot about presentation best practices from my colleague. Just like you need to be strategic, prepared, and clear about which data you want to share, you also need to be intentional about ensuring your presentations are accessible and can be consumed and understood by everyone. Let's dive into some accessibility tips to set you up for success, starting with the design of your presentation.
First, create clear, simple slides. Avoid using too many graphics, too much text, or too much animation. Visual complexity makes it harder for people to absorb information during your presentation, especially for those with a visual or cognitive impairment. If your slide uses animation, make sure that you don't leave people behind by making important content disappear. If people read more slowly or rely on an interpreter, they might need a bit more time to absorb the content.
Avoid using repetitive animation, like flashing or flickering, since it can be distracting and can trigger seizures. Simple doesn't have to mean boring, though. A simple slide can still be beautiful and informative. Just don't try to crowd too much information or activity into a single slide. If you generally don't use slides when giving a talk, consider giving it a try—even if you create just one slide with your main points.
If you rely only on your voice, that is, you don't provide any visual accompaniment, some people might have difficulty understanding, whether because of a language barrier or hearing or cognitive impairment. Another tip is to include alternative text, also called "alt text," for any images, drawings, or diagrams. Doing so describes the information relayed in a graphic to make it accessible to people who rely on screen readers.
To add alt text in Google Slides or PowerPoint, simply select the object, right-click, and then select "alt text." The same consideration applies to charts. Charts can be difficult to decipher, especially if they use a small font in order to fit more data. If your slide includes data-heavy charts or graphs, be sure to specify the takeaway either on the slide itself or in the speaker notes.
Next, always use text for critical information. Never rely only on color or other visual formatting to convey critical information on a chart or slide. Relying too heavily on visual formatting excludes anyone who is color-blind or unable to see the screen. For example, to highlight a new section of a flowchart, don't simply use a different color. Along with the color change, add a textual cue, such as the word "new." If your presentation relies heavily on images, consider including a written summary at the end of the presentation so that people can read your main points easily in one place.
Another tip is to include captions for video content and in real-time. Provide captions for all audio or video recordings shared in your presentation. If you're using a YouTube video, check that the YouTube automatic captioning is accurate. If it's not, request closed captioning through a captioning service. Use real-time captioning for your presentation, if available. Along with helping deaf or hard-of-hearing audience members, real-time captioning is useful if there are diverse accents and languages in the room, if the presenter speaks too quickly, if there are microphone issues, or if you have chatty audience members who are distracting their neighbors.
Another thing to remember is for contrast and text size, more is better. The difference between text and its background color is called contrast ratio. A high-contrast ratio makes it easier for people to read text or decipher images, especially if they're sitting far away or have low vision or color blindness. An ideal contrast ratio is 7:1. There are contrast checker tools available online, so be sure to check those out.
Recommendations for text size vary, but bigger is usually better. Before your presentation begins, go to the back of the room and make sure you can read your slides. Also, the use of all capital letters makes reading texts more difficult for some people, such as people with dyslexia. When possible, avoid using all caps. This is a simple change that can go a long way. My final tip is to share your content in advance.
If possible, send slides to your audience a few days before your presentation. This gives the audience a chance to review the content, and if needed, make arrangements to accommodate their own needs and preferences. For example, visually-impaired audience members might want to follow along with your slides on their own device with screen-reading software. If you aren't able to share your slides in advance, consider sending a document with a bulleted outline of your presentation.
If you're using acronyms or technical or obscure terminology, include a glossary with definitions. This information is especially helpful for sign language interpreters and captioners. All of these best practices you just learned will help make your presentations accessible to all of your audience members. Remember, you can't communicate information effectively if your audience can't easily access it.
For these and other best practices on how to make your documents and presentations more accessible, check out the resources tab. Coming up, you will learn about team communication and best practices. Good work so far! You're making real progress, and I'm excited to be a part of your journey.
## Activity Exemplar: Create a presentation 
Activity Exemplar: Create a presentation Here is a completed exemplar along with an explanation of how the exemplar fulfills the expectations for the activity. Completed Exemplar To view the exemplar for this course item, click the link below and select “Use Template.” Link to exemplar: Presentation OR If you don’t have a Google account, you can download the exemplar directly from the attachment below.Activity Exemplar Presentation.pptx Assessment of Exemplar Compare the exemplar to your completed presentation. Review your work using each of the criteria in the exemplar.
What did you do well? Where can you improve? Use your answers to these questions to guide you as you continue to progress through the course. Note: Your presentation reflects your own creative vision, so it likely differs from the exemplar in certain ways. Let’s review the exemplar components: Summary slide: The summary outlines the number of participants, the timeline, and the purpose of the survey: “We surveyed 50 Plant Pals test batch customers over a four-week period to learn about their satisfaction with the product, delivery process, and customer support.” Data point 1: This data point uses a line graph, since the results track the number of on-time deliveries over four weeks.
The delivery rate of 90% in week four is still short of the 95% target, so the action item is to investigate additional causes for late deliveries. Data point 2: This data point uses a column chart (also called a vertical bar chart), since the results compare preferred delivery windows throughout the day. (A pie chart can also work for this data point.) The action item is to schedule more deliveries for the preferred windows.
Data point 3: This data point uses a line graph, since it tracks satisfaction with support over time. Satisfaction went up significantly after the team fixed the software issue. The action item is to monitor responses to support tickets to identify areas for further improvement. Data point 4: This data point uses a pie chart, since it shows the percentages of total responses to the question.
The action items include shifting more resources in tutorials and live chat, since a large percentage of respondents found them helpful. Conclusion slide: The conclusion wraps up the presentation by summarizing the main points. It points out the team’s successes and gives recommendations for further improvements.
## Wrap-up
# Wrap-up Congrats on reaching the end of this module. So what did we learn? We learned that data plays a key part in the success of any organization and it impacts your role as a project manager. We've learned what data is, the value that data provides for your projects, and how it empowers you to achieve your project's goals. You learned about the different types of data, like metrics and projections, and how to identify and discern what information to watch for and to communicate to stakeholders.
We also discussed how important data is to help you make informed decisions and showcase areas where you and your team are being most effective, flagging potential risks, and opportunities to advance. We reviewed data visualization and data tools and learned that facts are usually easier to remember when there's a visual alongside it. We also discussed ways for you to present all of your insights to stakeholders, colleagues, and customers.
So let's pause so you can give yourself a high five for coming this far. Next up, we'll discuss leadership and the fundamentals of teamwork. Keep up the great work, and we'll meet you there when you're ready.