CHAPTER 29
Find Mentors, Find Mentees,
Repeat
To teach is to learn again.
—H. J. BROWN
Great musicians know it. So do professional athletes and
world-class CEOs. Successful people in nearly every field
know that they can't be their best unless they have a good coach in
their corner. And now the business world knows it, too: In a fast-
paced, fluid, and dynamic environment, where flattened organiza
tions made up of cross-functional teams must respond rapidly to
change, mentoring is one of the most effective strategies to get the
best out of each and every individual.
Many companies have developed formal mentoring programs
with the idea that sharing what you know and learning what oth
ers have to teach is just smart management. At FerrazziGreenlight,
we have worked with many companies to create such formal pro
grams with the idea that helping employees build relationships for
career success reduces turnover and ultimately leads to stronger
external relationships for revenue growth as well. One of the more
historically successful programs was established in 1997 at one of
Intel's largest chip-making facilities in New Mexico.
The people responsible for developing that program wanted to
go beyond the traditional notion of mentoring as a one-way
process that teamed seasoned executives with ambitious up-and-
comers. To the people at Intel, organization-wide mentoring
meant creating an inclusive learning network matching people
not by job title or by seniority but by specific skills that are in
demand. The company uses an intranet site and e-mail to break
down departmental barriers and create partnerships between two
people who can teach each other different valuable skills that they
need to be better employees. The system enables Intel to spread
best practices quickly throughout the global organization and
develop the best and brightest employees in the industry.
While it's wonderful the business world is finally catching on,
mentoring—a lifelong process of giving and receiving in a never-
ending role as both master and apprentice—has always been the
Holy Grail for those who love to connect people with people.
No process in history has done more to facilitate the exchange
of information, skills, wisdom, and contacts than mentoring.
Young men and women learned their trade by studying as appren
tices under their respective craftsmen. Young artists developed
their individual style only after years working under elder masters.
New priests apprenticed for a decade or more with older priests to
become wise religious men themselves. When finally these men
and women embarked on their own, they had the knowledge and
the connections to succeed in their chosen field.
By studying the lives of those who know more than we do, we
expand our horizons. As a child, I realized that many of the oppor
tunities other kids had that would expose them to new things and
new people, like summer camp or extra tutoring, were unavailable
to me. I quickly learned that success in my life would require deter
mination, exploration, self-reliance, and a strong will. I also learned
to rely on other people who were available: my father and some of
the more professional people he knew in our neighborhood.
My mom and dad instructed me to observe how the most suc
cessful people we knew worked and talked and lived. My parents
told me I could learn how to live my life by watching others live
their lives. My dad, of course, did all he could to nurture and teach
me what he knew. But he wanted me to know more than that; like
most fathers, he wanted me to be more than he was. He gave me
the confidence I needed to go out, without pride or insecurity, and
develop relationships with the men and women he knew whom
he respected.
Perhaps the value he placed on mentors came from Damon
Runyon, one of my father's favorite authors. A tough guy who
dropped out of school by the sixth grade and bootstrapped his
way to success, Runyon's tough-luck stories about equally tough
characters had a lot of emotional resonance for my dad. His
favorite quote of Runyon's was "Always try to rub up against
money, for if you rub up against money long enough, some of it
may rub off on you." No surprise, then, that my dad wanted me
rubbing up against people with more money, more knowledge,
and more skills than he had.
Before I was even ten years old, I remember him encouraging me
to bike down our dusty driveway to hang out with our neighbors. By
the time I was in grade school, I had reached out to George Love, the
father of one of my friends and a local attorney. Dad would take me
to see Walt Saling, a stockbroker, every so often just to visit. I'd sit
close by and pepper Walt with questions about his job and the
people he worked with. When I came home from prep school, Dad
and I would go on our "rounds." We'd go visit those people Dad
thought I'd learn something from: Toad and Julie Repasky, who
owned the local cement plant and whom Dad used to work for, or
the Fontanella sisters, who used to tutor me in Latin and math when
I was growing up. These men and women of our town were the
celebrities for our working-class family. They were professionals
with a good education, and that meant they had something to teach.
The fact is, from my father's perspective, everyone had some
thing to offer. When he'd go out for his weekly sit-down at a local
diner with his friends, he took me along. He wanted me to be
comfortable with older, more experienced people and to never
fear seeking their help or asking them questions. When my dad
would show up with me in tow on a Friday night, his buddies
would say, "Here's Pete [my father's name] and Re-Pete [my nick
name to his buddies]."
I look back on those times with so much gratitude and emo
tion. At every turn, and to this very day, I still try to connect with
trailblazers, head honchos, and people who have experienced a
different life than I've had.
My father and Runyon were onto something in a way, perhaps,
that was even more profound than they imagined. Research now
backs up their belief that whom you associate with is crucial to
who you become. Dr. David McClelland of Harvard University
researched the qualities and characteristics of high achievers in our
society. What he found was that your choice of a "reference group,"
the people you hang out with, was an important factor in deter
mining your future success or failure. In other words, if you hang
with connected people, you're connected. If you hang with success
ful people, you're more likely to become successful yourself.
Let me explain how important mentoring became for me
through an experience I had early on in my career. It was toward
the end of the summer before my second year at business school.
Deloitte and Touche, the accounting and consulting firm I had
been interning with during that summer, was having its annual
end-of-the-summer cocktail party for its interns from all around
the country.
Off to the corner, amid all the clink of drinks and polite chatter, I
saw a bunch of the partners and senior staff hanging around this big,
gruff, white-haired guy who was holding court. Other interns stayed
in their comfortable cliques, keeping their distance from their
bosses, but I headed straight for the poobahs. It was, really, no differ
ent from riding my bike down the road to see the neighbors.
I went straight up to the man in the center of all this action,
introduced myself, and asked him point blank, "Who are you?"
"I'm the CEO of this firm," he said with an abruptness that sig
naled I should have known that, while the partners around him
smiled and chuckled mischievously.
He was about six-foot-three, barrel-chested, and very, very
direct. He's the kind of guy who just fills the room with his presence.
"Well, I guess I should have known that," I responded.
"Yeah, I guess you should have," he said. He was joking, and as
is often the case with people in positions of power, he liked my
candor and chutzpah. He introduced himself as Pat Loconto.
"Loconto," I said. "That's a good Jewish name, isn't it?"
He laughed, and I talked with him in the little Italian that he
and I knew. In short order, we were fully engaged, talking about
our families and our similar upbringing. His dad was also a first-
generation Italian-American who instilled in him many of the
same values my father had taught me. I did, in fact, know Pat, but
only by reputation. I had heard about his no-nonsense style—
tough and tireless but warmhearted, too. I decided then and there
that getting to know him better might not be a bad idea.
That I approached him at the cocktail party and discovered
we were cut from similar cloth deepened my respect for the man
and his respect for me. I found out later that quickly after that
exchange, he followed up and found out everything about me and
my summer with the firm. That night I hung out with Pat and the
senior partners into the wee hours of the morning. I didn't try to
be anyone I wasn't. I didn't overstretch and pretend to know more
than I did. Many people believe that's what it takes when reaching
out to those above you, but in truth that often results in making a
jerk out of yourself.
I remembered that my father and mother had told me to speak
less in such situations; the less you say, the more you'll likely hear.
They were warning me, given my predisposition for dominating a
conversation from an early age. That's the way you learn from oth
ers, Dad said, and glean the small nuances that will help you engen
der a deeper relationship later on. There's also no better way to
signal your interest in becoming a mentee. People tacitly notice
your respect and are flattered by the attention. That said, quiet for
me isn't exactly quiet. I asked tons of questions, suggested things
that I saw from the summer, and conspired with these leaders of the
firm on what was important to them—making the firm a success.
Mentoring is a very deliberate activity that requires people to
check their ego at the door, hold back from resenting other peo
ple's success, and consciously strive to build beneficial relation
ships whenever the opportunity arises. Other interns at that party
looked at Pat and the other senior partners with intimidation and
boredom (What do I have in common with them?) and therefore
kept their distance. They looked at their job titles versus the big
wigs' and felt excluded, and because of it, they were.
When I finally graduated from school, in typical MBA fashion,
I interviewed with several companies. My choice was coming
down to Deloitte Consulting and one of their competitors, Mc-
Kinsey. McKinsey was then considered the gold standard of con
sulting companies. For most of my peers, the choice would have
been obvious.
Then, one afternoon, I got a call the day before my final Mc
Kinsey interview. When I picked up the phone, I was met with a
familiar gruff voice. "Accept our offer now and you can come
down to New York for dinner this evening with me and some of
my partners." Before I had a chance to respond, he said, "It's Pat
Loconto. I want to know if you're coming to Deloitte or not?"
I told Pat, uncomfortably, that I hadn't decided on where I'd
end up. But I had an idea that might help me through the process.
"Listen, I'm still up in the air," I told him. "But it would help if I
had dinner with you and a few partners to get a better feel for
what I'd be doing and where the organization is headed."
"I'll have dinner with you only if you accept my offer," he said.
Pat was joking again, and I liked him even more for his unortho
dox recruiting practices. Then he let me off the hook with, "OK,
get your butt down to New York, and don't worry, we'll get you
out to Chicago in the morning for your interview." Now, how did
he know about my interview?
So I found myself with Pat and a few partners around a table at
Grifone, their favorite Italian restaurant in Manhattan. The banter
was hard and heavy, as was the drinking. We had gone through
bottles and bottles of great wine and a few cognacs on top of that.
Near the end of dinner, Pat threw out his pitch and actually
launched into a fairly shocking tirade.
"Who the hell do you think you are? You think McKinsey gives
a damn about Keith Ferrazzi?" Before I could answer, he contin
ued. "You think the CEO of McKinsey knows who you are? You
think any of the senior partners would take a Sunday night to have
dinner with you? You'll be just another number-crunching MBA
grad lost in the shuffle. We care about you. We want you to be suc
cessful here. More importantly, we think you can make a differ
ence in our firm."
Was I in? Pat demanded to know.
Wow, his pitch was compelling, and right then my instinct told
me he was right. I knew he was right. But I wasn't about to leave
that dinner without making a small pitch of my own.
"Look, I'll make you a deal," I said. "If I accept your offer, all I
ask is that you give me three dinners a year at this very restaurant
for as long as I'm at Deloitte. I'm in if you're in."
He looked me in the eyes and then with the biggest smile said,
"Great. Welcome to Deloitte."
By the way, I then asked him for more money. He just shook
his head and laughed. Well, it never hurts to ask; the worst he
could have said was no. So, after three hours in a restaurant, this
man convinced me to make a life-changing career decision with-
out one word about title, salary, or even one detail of how he
expected I might make a difference.
Honestly, I still had my doubts at the beginning that I had
made the right move. In consulting, Deloitte's was smaller pota
toes those days; its prestige didn't compare with McKinsey's.
But what a right move I had made—in fact, it was the best of
my life. First, because I went to Deloitte Consulting, I was given
more responsibilities and I learned more about consulting in the
eight years that followed than most people learn in twenty. Sec
ond, I found I could make a difference given my access to the sen
ior partners. Third, and most important, I realized that finding a
talented, experienced mentor who is willing to invest the time and
effort to develop you as a person and a professional is far more
important than making career decisions based purely on salary or
prestige.
Besides, back then the money wasn't important. You learn in
your twenties, as the saying goes, and earn in your thirties. And
boy, did I ever learn. Each year, Pat and I had at least three dinners
at Grifone, that same Italian restaurant. For my entire tenure at
Deloitte, I had the ear of the CEO, and he kept asking about me
among his partners. He was looking out for me the entire time.
Ultimately, of course, I got to work closely with Pat and other
amazing men and women at Deloitte, and it taught me the impor
tance of attaching yourself to great people, great teachers. Not that
working with Pat and his right-hand man Bob Kirk was easy. They
taught me some hard lessons about staying focused; that bold
ideas weren't enough if they couldn't be executed; that the details
are as significant as the theories; that you had to put people first,
all people, not just those above you. Pat probably should have
fired me a few times. Instead, he invested time and energy into
making me the kind of executive—and more important, the kind
of leader—he wanted me to be for the sake of the firm and for the
sake of his role as mentor.
There were two crucial components that made my mentorship
with Pat—and makes any mentorship, for that matter—successful.
He offered his guidance because, for one, I promised something in
return. I worked nonstop in an effort to use the knowledge he was
imparting to make him, and his firm, more successful. And two,
we created a situation that went beyond utility. Pat liked me and
became emotionally invested in my advancement. He cared about
me. That's the key to a successful mentorship. A successful men
toring relationship needs equal parts utility and emotion. You
can't simply ask somebody to be personally invested in you. There
has to be some reciprocity involved—whether its hard work or
loyalty that you give in return—that gets someone to invest in you
in the first place. Then, when the process kicks in, you have to
mold your mentor into a coach; someone for whom your success
is in some small or big way his success. I owe so much to Pat. If it
were not for him, I would not be the man I am today. And that
goes for so many others, starting with my Mom and Dad and Jack
Pidgeon from the Kiski School, and my "Uncle" Bob Wilson, to so
so so many others I've mentioned in this book, as well as those left
unmentioned but to whom I feel so close.
The best way to approach utility is to give help first, and not
ask for it. If there is someone whose knowledge you need, find a
way to be of use to that person. Consider their needs and how you
can assist them. If you can't help them specifically, perhaps you
can contribute to their charity, company, or community. You have
to be prepared to give back to your mentors and have them know
that from the outset. Before Pat would consider having dinner
with me three times a year, he had to know that I would be com
mitted to his firm. That's how I found myself so early on in a
trusted position that later turned into a friendship.
If, however, there are no immediate opportunities to help, you
must be prudent and conscious of the imposition you're placing
on that person. Almost every day, some ambitious young man or
woman sends me an e-mail that states all too directly, "I want a job."
Or, "I think you can help me. Take me on as your mentee." I shud
der at how deeply these young folks misunderstand the process. If
they're going to get my help, and they haven't even offered their
help in return, then at minimum they should attempt to endear
themselves to me. Tell me why you're special. Tell me what we have
in common. Express gratitude, excitement, and passion.
The problem is often that these people have never had mentors
before and they have a limited view of how it works. Some people
think there is just one special person out there waiting to be all
things at all times to them. But as my father taught me, mentors
are all around you. It's not necessarily your boss or even someone
in your business. Mentoring is a nonhierarchical activity that
transcends careers and can cross all organizational levels.
A CEO can learn from a manager, and vice versa. Some smart
companies, recognizing this fact, actually have programs in place
that view new hires as mentors to the company. After a month on
the job, they'll ask these new employees to jot down all their
impressions with the idea that a pair of fresh eyes can see old
problems and make innovative suggestions that others can't.
In fact, the people I've learned so much from are my own
young mentees, who help me periodically to update my skills and
view the world anew.
As much as you stretch yourself by reaching up, be sure you are
stretching just as far to reach back and help others. I've always
taken the time to give young people a helping hand. Most of them
actually end up working for me at some point, either as interns or
employees. People like Paul Lussow, Chad Hodge, Hani Abisaid,
Andy Bohn, Brinda Chugani, Anna Mongayt, John Lux, Jason
Annis. The list goes on and on.
There are those who don't get it at first. They sheepishly ask,
"How can I ever repay you for all that you are doing?" I tell them
they're repaying me now. All I really expect is sincere gratitude,
and to see them apply all that they are learning.
To see Brinda moving up at Deloitte, Hani becoming a partner
in one of my businesses and "graduating" into a new company I
had a hand in forming, Chad becoming one of Hollywood's most
successful young writers, Andy becoming a player in Hollywood
himself, or Paul attending Wharton is a total thrill. It's even more
so when they get to a point in their careers when they start becom
ing mentors themselves.
I can't stress enough how powerful the process is and how
important it is that you give your respect and time to it. In return,
you'll be more than compensated with spirit, enthusiasm, trust,
and empathy—all things that will ultimately far exceed the value
of any advice you gave.
If you take mentoring seriously, and give it the time and energy
it deserves, you'll soon find yourself involved in a learning net
work not unlike the one Intel uses. You'll be the recipient of more
information and more goodwill than you ever imagined, as you
play the role of both master and apprentice in a powerful constel
lation of people all simultaneously teaching and being taught.
CONNECTORS' HALL OF FAME PROFILE
Eleanor Roosevelt (1884-1962)
"Connecting should advance, rather than compromise, your principles."
If connecting can be described, loosely, as the commingling of
friendship and mission, then First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt was
one of the twentieth century's premier practitioners. In her autobiog
raphy, she wrote: being "drawn together through the work . . .
is . . . one of the most satisfying ways of making and keeping
friends." Through groups such as the International Congress of
Working Women and the Women's International League of Peace
and Freedom (WILPF), Roosevelt befriended a wide circle of
friends—and a few foes—in advancing some of the great social
causes of our time.
The First Lady was not timid about using her personal network to
tackle testy social issues. For example, she fought for women's
rights in the workplace—their inclusion in labor unions and their
right to a living wage. Today, those seem like uncontroversial
issues, but during the late 1 920s and early 1 930s, many Ameri
cans blamed working women for displacing male "breadwinners"
in the midst of the Great Depression.
Roosevelt believed the beauty and obligation of living in a
democracy was to make a stand for what you believe in; and she
proved you could do so while gaining the trust and admiration of
your peers. She also proved that sometimes it was your peers
whom you need to stand up against.
In 1936, thanks largely to the First Lady, an opera singer named
Marian Anderson became the first black person to perform at the
White House. But Anderson's acceptance at 1600 Pennsylvania
Avenue was unusual. Though Anderson was the country's third-
highest concert box-office draw, her success did not exempt her
from the racial biases that pervaded her era. When traveling, she
was restricted to "colored" waiting rooms, hotels, and train cars. In
the South, newspapers rarely called her "Miss Anderson," opting
for "Artist Anderson" and "Singer Anderson" instead.
In 1939, Anderson's manager and Howard University tried to
arrange a performance at Constitution Hall in Washington, D.C.
The Daughters of the American Revolution (D.A.R.), the organiza
tion that owned the Hall, refused them. Roosevelt, herself a member
of the D.A.R., promptly—and publicly—resigned her membership
to protest. In a letter to the D.A.R., she wrote: "/ am in complete dis
agreement with the attitude taken in refusing Constitution Hall to a
great artist . . . You had an opportunity to lead in an enlightened
way and it seems to me that your organization has failed."
Mrs. Roosevelt arranged for Anderson to perform on the steps of
the Lincoln Memorial. The show, on April 9 (Easter Sunday), 1 939,
was seen by a crowd of 75,000.
Yes, loyalty matters. But not when it means sacrificing your prin
ciples.
Though Eleanor Roosevelt's positions on civil rights hardly
seem radical today, they were far in advance of her time: All of this
was decades before the Supreme Court, in its 1954 Brown v. Board
of Education case, rejected the "separate but equal" doctrine.
Every time the First Lady advocated for a social cause, preached
tolerance in a black church or Jewish temple, or even when, acting
as a delegate to the newly formed United Nations, which passed
the controversial Universal Declaration of Human Rights, she lost
friends and received vicious criticism for going against the tide.
Still, this amazing woman persisted in successfully building
influence for a progressive agenda. She left a legacy to which we
are all indebted. What can we learn from Eleanor Roosevelt? It's
not enough simply to reach out to others; instead, we all must be
vigilant that our efforts to bring people together are in line with
our efforts to, in part, make the world a better place.
Of course, when you're driven by principles, there are always
sacrifices involved. But your determination to connect with others
should never come at the expense of your values. In fact, your net
work of colleagues and friends, if chosen wisely, can help you fight
for causes you believe in.