CHAPTER 25
The Write Stuff
This is one of those tricks of the networking trade that may
not seem big, but boy, can it come in handy.
If you have any writing skills at all—and yes, the good news is
we all have some level of skill—you can get close to almost anyone
by doing a piece on them, or with them, even if it's for your local
newspaper.
Me, write? I don't have a Shakespearean bone in my body, you
say. Well, no one has had that bone for 500 years.
These days, with the Internet and newsstands busting at their
seams with publications of every imaginable orientation, every
one can be an author. And writing articles can be a great boost for
your career. It provides instant credibility and visibility. It can
become a key arrow in your self-marketing quiver, creating rela
tionships with highly respected people and helping you develop a
skill that's always in high demand.
First, get over all the romantic pretensions around writing. In
business school, when I was dreaming about publishing an article
in the Harvard Business Review, I had a wonderful encounter with
a visiting professor who had written a number of high-profile arti
cles and books. I asked her how I, too, could become a writer.
"Write," she told me.
Brows furrowed, I nodded. When no more advice came from
her esteemed mouth, I asked: "Anything else?"
"Write, then write some more. When you're done—and here's
the kicker—keep writing.
"Look," she said, "there is no secret. Writing is tough. But
people of all talents, at all levels, do it. The only thing necessary
to become a writer is a pen, some paper, and the will to express
yourself."
Bright woman. Want to write something? Write it. Want to get
published? Call an editor and tell him you want to submit an arti
cle. Your first time may be a flaming failure. Nothing in life is a
sure thing. But that's how people do it.
A lot of business writing is collaborative. While the hunger to
be recognized is great, busy people higher up the ladder often
don't have the extra time to work alone on something like an arti
cle. Instead, they choose to either contribute their expertise or
work with others to get it done.
The process I've used to pull these types of things off is simple.
First, what's your content? What kind of interesting things are
going on in your industry or personal life? Have you learned to do
what you do differently or found an easier and more efficient way
of doing it?
Once you've got a hook—some subject of interest you'd like to
explore that you think others will find interesting—get in touch
with the editor of a publication that's likely to publish such mate
rial. You don't have to make the op-ed page of the New York Times.
Community newspapers, professional newsletters, even in-house
company publications have white space they need to fill. At this
stage, all you're looking for is some tentative buy-in, a small show
of interest that you can use to gain access to others in researching
the piece. And once you get published, you've got a track record—
and samples of your work that you can use to snatch more
chances.
What's an editor going to say when you pitch him or her an
idea? Probably something like "Sure, sounds great. Very busy.
Gotta go. Let me see it when it's done." This is how editors talk and
this is what they invariably say.
But now, when you call others to interview them, you're not
just Joe Shmo, you're Joe Shmo calling about an article targeted
for the Poughkeepsie Gazette (or something like that). And these
aren't just random people you're calling, either. These are the peo
ple you've painstakingly targeted as the top experts and thinkers
in the subject you're investigating.
What you've just unknowingly done, by calling these people and
setting up an interview, is established a terrific environment for
meeting anyone anywhere. The odds will never be stacked so clearly
in your favor. The subject of conversation is something you know
the other person is fascinated with. And by then, you'll have had the
time to become pretty snazzy with the subject yourself. You're offer
ing value through the publicity you'll potentially garner. And the
mutual understanding that you're working together toward a com
mon objective will make what would normally be a formal affair
into something much closer. It's an opportunity to shine!
Most of the time, I like to share credit and offer a byline to the
person who becomes most helpful. Explain that their insights are
truly unique and impressive and that you would welcome their
coauthorship. You'll do the research and writing and all they have to
do is give some time and energy to the project. Then, once you begin
to collaborate, ask them (or they more than likely will volunteer) to
open their network to you for additional research and interviews.
And just like that, you're expanding your network exponentially
with contacts that otherwise might have seemed out of reach.
Guess what? By article's end, whether it's been published or not,
you've managed to learn a great deal and to meet a group of impor
tant people who potentially might be important to your future. And
you now have a very good reason to stay in touch with them.