THE MYTH OF CHARISMATIC LEADERSHIP
The Culture of Personality, a Hundred Years Later
Society is itself an education in the extrovert values, and rarely has there been a
society that has preached them so hard. No man is an island, but how John Donne
would writhe to hear how often, and for what reasons, the thought is so tiresomely
repeated.
—WILLIAM WHYTE
Salesmanship as a Virtue: Live with Tony Robbins
“Are you excited?” cries a young woman named Stacy as I hand her
my registration forms. Her honeyed voice rises into one big
exclamation point. I nod and smile as brightly as I can. Across the
lobby of the Atlanta Convention Center, I hear people shrieking.
“What’s that noise?” I ask.
“They’re getting everyone pumped up to go inside!” Stacy
enthuses. “That’s part of the whole UPW experience.” She hands me
a purple spiral binder and a laminated nametag to wear around my
neck. UNLEASH THE POWER WITHIN, proclaims the binder in big
block letters. Welcome to Tony Robbins’s entry-level seminar.
I’ve paid $895 in exchange, according to the promotional
materials, for learning how to be more energetic, gain momentum
in my life, and conquer my fears. But the truth is that I’m not here
to unleash the power within me (though I’m always happy to pick
up a few pointers); I’m here because this seminar is the first stop on
my journey to understand the Extrovert Ideal.
I’ve seen Tony Robbins’s infomercials—he claims that there’s
always one airing at any given moment—and he strikes me as one
of the more extroverted people on earth. But he’s not just any
extrovert. He’s the king of self-help, with a client roster that has
included President Clinton, Tiger Woods, Nelson Mandela, Margaret
Thatcher, Princess Diana, Mikhail Gorbachev, Mother Teresa,
Serena Williams, Donna Karan—and 50 million other people. And
the self-help industry, into which hundreds of thousands of
Americans pour their hearts, souls, and some $11 billion a year, by
definition reveals our conception of the ideal self, the one we aspire
to become if only we follow the seven principles of this and the
three laws of that. I want to know what this ideal self looks like.
Stacy asks if I’ve brought my meals with me. It seems a strange
question: Who carries supper with them from New York City to
Atlanta? She explains that I’ll want to refuel at my seat; for the next
four days, Friday through Monday, we’ll be working fifteen hours a
day, 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., with only one short afternoon break.
Tony will be onstage the entire time and I won’t want to miss a
moment.
I look around the lobby. Other people seem to have come
prepared—they’re strolling toward the hall, cheerfully lugging
grocery bags stuffed with PowerBars, bananas, and corn chips. I
pick up a couple of bruised apples from the snack bar and make my
way to the auditorium. Greeters wearing UPW T-shirts and ecstatic
smiles line the entrance, springing up and down, fists pumping. You
can’t get inside without slapping them five. I know, because I try.
Inside the vast hall, a phalanx of dancers is warming up the crowd
to the Billy Idol song “Mony Mony,” amplified by a world-class
sound system, magnified on giant Megatron screens flanking the
stage. They move in sync like backup dancers in a Britney Spears
video, but are dressed like middle managers. The lead performer is
a fortysomething balding fellow wearing a white button-down shirt,
conservative tie, rolled-up sleeves, and a great-to-meet-you smile.
The message seems to be that we can all learn to be this exuberant
when we get to work every morning.
Indeed, the dance moves are simple enough for us to imitate at
our seats: jump and clap twice; clap to the left; clap to the right.
When the song changes to “Gimme Some Lovin’,” many in the
audience climb atop their metal folding chairs, where they continue
to whoop and clap. I stand somewhat peevishly with arms crossed
until I decide that there’s nothing to be done but join in and hop up
and down along with my seatmates.
Eventually the moment we’ve all been waiting for arrives: Tony
Robbins bounds onstage. Already gigantic at six feet seven inches,
he looks a hundred feet tall on the Megatron screen. He’s movie-star
handsome, with a head of thick brown hair, a Pepsodent smile, and
impossibly defined cheekbones. EXPERIENCE TONY ROBBINS
LIVE! the seminar advertisement had promised, and now here he is,
dancing with the euphoric crowd.
It’s about fifty degrees in the hall, but Tony is wearing a short-
sleeved polo shirt and shorts. Many in the audience have brought
blankets with them, having somehow known that the auditorium
would be kept refrigerator-cold, presumably to accommodate
Tony’s high-octane metabolism. It would take another Ice Age to
cool this man off. He’s leaping and beaming and managing,
somehow, to make eye contact with all 3,800 of us. The greeters
jump rapturously in the aisles. Tony opens his arms wide,
embracing us all. If Jesus returned to Earth and made his first stop
at the Atlanta Convention Center, it would be hard to imagine a
more jubilant reception.
This is true even in the back row where I’m sitting with others
who spent only $895 for “general admission,” as opposed to $2,500
for a “Diamond Premiere Membership,” which gets you a seat up
front, as close to Tony as possible. When I bought my ticket over
the phone, the account rep advised me that the people in the front
rows—where “you’re looking directly at Tony for sure” instead of
relying on the Megatron—are generally “more successful in life.”
“Those are the people who have more energy,” she advised. “Those
are the people who are screaming.” I have no way of judging how
successful the people next to me are, but they certainly seem
thrilled to be here. At the sight of Tony, exquisitely stage-lit to set
off his expressive face, they cry out and pour into the aisles rock-
concert style.
Soon enough, I join them. I’ve always loved to dance, and I have
to admit that gyrating en masse to Top 40 classics is an excellent
way to pass the time. Unleashed power comes from high energy,
according to Tony, and I can see his point. No wonder people travel
from far and wide to see him in person (there’s a lovely young
woman from Ukraine sitting—no, leaping—next to me with a
delighted smile). I really must start doing aerobics again when I get
back to New York, I decide.
When the music finally stops, Tony addresses us in a raspy voice,
half Muppet, half bedroom-sexy, introducing his theory of “Practical
Psychology.” The gist of it is that knowledge is useless until it’s
coupled with action. He has a seductive, fast-talking delivery that
Willy Loman would have sighed over. Demonstrating practical
psychology in action, Tony instructs us to find a partner and to
greet each other as if we feel inferior and scared of social rejection.
I team up with a construction worker from downtown Atlanta, and
we extend tentative handshakes, looking bashfully at the ground as
the song “I Want You to Want Me” plays in the background.
Then Tony calls out a series of artfully phrased questions:
“Was your breath full or shallow?”
“SHALLOW!” yells the audience in unison.
“Did you hesitate or go straight toward them?”
“HESITATE!”
“Was there tension in your body or were you relaxed?”
“TENSION!”
Tony asks us to repeat the exercise, but this time to greet our
partners as if the impression we make in the first three to five
seconds determines whether they’ll do business with us. If they
don’t, “everyone you care about will die like pigs in hell.”
I’m startled by Tony’s emphasis on business success—this is a
seminar about personal power, not sales. Then I remember that
Tony is not only a life coach but also a businessman extraordinaire;
he started his career in sales and today serves as chairman of seven
privately held companies. BusinessWeek once estimated his income
at $80 million a year. Now he seems to be trying, with all the force
of his mighty personality, to impart his salesman’s touch. He wants
us not only to feel great but to radiate waves of energy, not just to
be liked, but to be well liked; he wants us to know how to sell
ourselves. I’ve already been advised by the Anthony Robbins
Companies, via a personalized forty-five-page report generated by
an online personality test that I took in preparation for this
weekend, that “Susan” should work on her tendency to tell, not sell,
her ideas. (The report was written in the third person, as if it was to
be reviewed by some imaginary manager evaluating my people
skills.)
The audience divides into pairs again, enthusiastically introducing
themselves and pumping their partners’ hands. When we’re finished,
the questions repeat.
“Did that feel better, yes or no?”
“YES!”
“Did you use your body differently, yes or no?”
“YES!”
“Did you use more muscles in your face, yes or no?”
“YES!”
“Did you move straight toward them, yes or no?”
“YES!”
This exercise seems designed to show how our physiological state
influences our behavior and emotions, but it also suggests that
salesmanship governs even the most neutral interactions. It implies
that every encounter is a high-stakes game in which we win or lose
the other person’s favor. It urges us to meet social fear in as
extroverted a manner as possible. We must be vibrant and
confident, we must not seem hesitant, we must smile so that our
interlocutors will smile upon us. Taking these steps will make us
feel good—and the better we feel, the better we can sell ourselves.
Tony seems the perfect person to demonstrate such skills. He
strikes me as having a “hyperthymic” temperament—a kind of
extroversion-on-steroids characterized, in the words of one
psychiatrist, by “exuberant, upbeat, overenergetic, and
overconfident lifelong traits” that have been recognized as an asset
in business, especially sales. People with these traits often make
wonderful company, as Tony does onstage.
But what if you admire the hyperthymic among us, but also like
your calm and thoughtful self? What if you love knowledge for its
own sake, not necessarily as a blueprint to action? What if you wish
there were more, not fewer, reflective types in the world?
Tony seems to have anticipated such questions. “But I’m not an
extrovert, you say!” he told us at the start of the seminar. “So? You
don’t have to be an extrovert to feel alive!”
True enough. But it seems, according to Tony, that you’d better
act like one if you don’t want to flub the sales call and watch your
family die like pigs in hell.
The evening culminates with the Firewalk, one of the flagship
moments of the UPW seminar, in which we’re challenged to walk
across a ten-foot bed of coals without burning our feet. Many
people attend UPW because they’ve heard about the Firewalk and
want to try it themselves. The idea is to propel yourself into such a
fearless state of mind that you can withstand even 1,200-degree
heat.
Leading up to that moment, we spend hours practicing Tony’s
techniques—exercises, dance moves, visualizations. I notice that
people in the audience are starting to mimic Tony’s every
movement and facial expression, including his signature gesture of
pumping his arm as if he were pitching a baseball. The evening
crescendoes until finally, just before midnight, we march to the
parking lot in a torchlit procession, nearly four thousand strong,
chanting YES! YES! YES! to the thump of a tribal beat. This seems
to electrify my fellow UPWers, but to me this drum-accompanied
chant—YES! Ba-da-da-da, YES! Dum-dum-dum-DUM, YES! Ba-da-da-
da—sounds like the sort of thing a Roman general would stage to
announce his arrival in the city he’s about to sack. The greeters who
manned the gates to the auditorium earlier in the day with high
fives and bright smiles have morphed into gatekeepers of the
Firewalk, arms beckoning toward the bridge of flames.
As best I can tell, a successful Firewalk depends not so much on
your state of mind as on how thick the soles of your feet happen to
be, so I watch from a safe distance. But I seem to be the only one
hanging back. Most of the UPWers make it across, whooping as
they go.
“I did it!” they cry when they get to the other side of the firepit.
“I did it!”
They’ve entered a Tony Robbins state of mind. But what exactly
does this consist of?
It is, first and foremost, a superior mind—the antidote to Alfred
Adler’s inferiority complex. Tony uses the word power rather than
superior (we’re too sophisticated nowadays to frame our quests for
self-improvement in terms of naked social positioning, the way we
did at the dawn of the Culture of Personality), but everything about
him is an exercise in superiority, from the way he occasionally
addresses the audience as “girls and boys,” to the stories he tells
about his big houses and powerful friends, to the way he towers—
literally—over the crowd. His superhuman physical size is an
important part of his brand; the title of his best-selling book,
Awaken the Giant Within, says it all.
His intellect is impressive, too. Though he believes university
educations are overrated (because they don’t teach you about your
emotions and your body, he says) and has been slow to write his
next book (because no one reads anymore, according to Tony), he’s
managed to assimilate the work of academic psychologists and
package it into one hell of a show, with genuine insights the
audience can make their own.
Part of Tony’s genius lies in the unstated promise that he’ll let the
audience share his own journey from inferiority to superiority. He
wasn’t always so grand, he tells us. As a kid, he was a shrimp.
Before he got in shape, he was overweight. And before he lived in a
castle in Del Mar, California, he rented an apartment so small that
he kept his dishes in the bathtub. The implication is that we can all
get over whatever’s keeping us down, that even introverts can learn
to walk on coals while belting out a lusty YES.
The second part of the Tony state of mind is good-heartedness. He
wouldn’t inspire so many people if he didn’t make them feel that he
truly cared about unleashing the power within each of them. When
Tony’s onstage, you get the sense that he’s singing, dancing, and
emoting with every ounce of his energy and heart. There are
moments, when the crowd is on its feet, singing and dancing in
unison, that you can’t help but love him, the way many people
loved Barack Obama with a kind of shocked delight when they first
heard him talk about transcending red and blue. At one point, Tony
talks about the different needs people have—for love, certainty,
variety, and so on. He is motivated by love, he tells us, and we
believe him.
But there’s also this: throughout the seminar, he constantly tries
to “upsell” us. He and his sales team use the UPW event, whose
attendees have already paid a goodly sum, to market multi-day
seminars with even more alluring names and stiffer price tags: Date
with Destiny, about $5,000; Mastery University, about $10,000; and
the Platinum Partnership, which, for a cool $45,000 a year, buys
you and eleven other Platinum Partners the right to go on exotic
vacations with Tony.
During the afternoon break, Tony lingers onstage with his blond
and sweetly beautiful wife, Sage, gazing into her eyes, caressing her
hair, murmuring into her ear. I’m happily married, but right now
Ken is in New York and I’m here in Atlanta, and even I feel lonely
as I watch this spectacle. What would it be like if I were single or
unhappily partnered? It would “arouse an eager want” in me, just as
Dale Carnegie advised salesmen to do with their prospects so many
years ago. And sure enough, when the break is over, a lengthy
video comes on the mega-screen, pitching Tony’s relationship-
building seminar.
In another brilliantly conceived segment, Tony devotes part of
the seminar to explaining the financial and emotional benefits of
surrounding oneself with the right “peer group”—after which a
staffer begins a sales pitch for the $45,000 Platinum program. Those
who purchase one of the twelve spots will join the “ultimate peer
group,” we are told—the “cream of the crop,” the “elite of the elite
of the elite.”
I can’t help but wonder why none of the other UPWers seem to
mind, or even to notice, these upselling techniques. By now many of
them have shopping bags at their feet, full of stuff they bought out
in the lobby—DVDs, books, even eight-by-ten glossies of Tony
himself, ready for framing.
But the thing about Tony—and what draws people to buy his
products—is that like any good salesman, he believes in what he’s
pitching. He apparently sees no contradiction between wanting the
best for people and wanting to live in a mansion. He persuades us
that he’s using his sales skills not only for personal gain but also to
help as many of us as he can reach. Indeed, one very thoughtful
introvert I know, a successful salesman who gives sales training
seminars of his own, swears that Tony Robbins not only improved
his business but also made him a better person. When he started
attending events like UPW, he says, he focused on who he wanted
to become, and now, when he delivers his own seminars, he is that
person. “Tony gives me energy,” he says, “and now I can create
energy for other people when I’m onstage.”
At the onset of the Culture of Personality, we were urged to
develop an extroverted personality for frankly selfish reasons—as a
way of outshining the crowd in a newly anonymous and competitive
society. But nowadays we tend to think that becoming more
extroverted not only makes us more successful, but also makes us
better people. We see salesmanship as a way of sharing one’s gifts
with the world.
This is why Tony’s zeal to sell to and be adulated by thousands of
people at once is seen not as narcissism or hucksterism, but as
leadership of the highest order. If Abraham Lincoln was the
embodiment of virtue during the Culture of Character, then Tony
Robbins is his counterpart during the Culture of Personality. Indeed,
when Tony mentions that he once thought of running for president
of the United States, the audience erupts in loud cheers.
But does it always make sense to equate leadership with hyper-
extroversion? To find out, I visited Harvard Business School, an
institution that prides itself on its ability to identify and train some
of the most prominent business and political leaders of our time.
The Myth of Charismatic Leadership: Harvard Business School
and Beyond
The first thing I notice about the Harvard Business School campus is
the way people walk. No one ambles, strolls, or lingers. They stride,
full of forward momentum. It’s crisp and autumnal the week I visit,
and the students’ bodies seem to vibrate with September electricity
as they advance across campus. When they cross each other’s paths
they don’t merely nod—they exchange animated greetings,
inquiring about this one’s summer with J. P. Morgan or that one’s
trek in the Himalayas.
They behave the same way inside the social hothouse of the
Spangler Center, the sumptuously decorated student center.
Spangler has fioor-to-ceiling silk curtains in sea-foam green, rich
leather sofas, giant Samsung high-definition TVs silently
broadcasting campus news, and soaring ceilings festooned with
high-wattage chandeliers. The tables and sofas are clustered mostly
on the perimeter of the room, forming a brightly lit center catwalk
down which the students breezily parade, seemingly unaware that
all eyes are on them. I admire their nonchalance.
The students are even better turned out than their surroundings,
if such a thing is possible. No one is more than five pounds
overweight or has bad skin or wears odd accessories. The women
are a cross between Head Cheerleader and Most Likely to Succeed.
They wear fitted jeans, filmy blouses, and high-heeled peekaboo-
toed shoes that make a pleasing clickety–clack on Spangler’s
polished wood floors. Some parade like fashion models, except that
they’re social and beaming instead of aloof and impassive. The men
are clean-cut and athletic; they look like people who expect to be in
charge, but in a friendly, Eagle Scout sort of way. I have the feeling
that if you asked one of them for driving directions, he’d greet you
with a can-do smile and throw himself into the task of helping you
to your destination—whether or not he knew the way.
I sit down next to a couple of students who are in the middle of
planning a road trip—HBS students are forever coordinating pub
crawls and parties, or describing an extreme-travel junket they’ve
just come back from. When they ask what brings me to campus, I
say that I’m conducting interviews for a book about introversion
and extroversion. I don’t tell them that a friend of mine, himself an
HBS grad, once called the place the “Spiritual Capital of
Extroversion.” But it turns out that I don’t have to tell them.
“Good luck finding an introvert around here,” says one.
“This school is predicated on extroversion,” adds the other. “Your
grades and social status depend on it. It’s just the norm here.
Everyone around you is speaking up and being social and going
out.”
“Isn’t there anyone on the quieter side?” I ask.
They look at me curiously.
“I couldn’t tell you,” says the first student dismissively.
Harvard Business School is not, by any measure, an ordinary place.
Founded in 1908, just when Dale Carnegie hit the road as a
traveling salesman and only three years before he taught his first
class in public speaking, the school sees itself as “educating leaders
who make a difference in the world.” President George W. Bush is a
graduate, as are an impressive collection of World Bank presidents,
U.S. Treasury secretaries, New York City mayors, CEOs of
companies like General Electric, Goldman Sachs, Procter & Gamble,
and, more notoriously, Jeffrey Skilling, the villain of the Enron
scandal. Between 2004 and 2006, 20 percent of the top three
executives at the Fortune 500 companies were HBS grads.
HBS grads likely have influenced your life in ways you’re not
aware of. They have decided who should go to war and when; they
have resolved the fate of Detroit’s auto industry; they play leading
roles in just about every crisis to shake Wall Street, Main Street,
and Pennsylvania Avenue. If you work in corporate America, there’s
a good chance that Harvard Business School grads have shaped your
everyday life, too, weighing in on how much privacy you need in
your workspace, how many team-building sessions you need to
attend per year, and whether creativity is best achieved through
brainstorming or solitude. Given the scope of their influence, it’s
worth taking a look at who enrolls here—and what they value by
the time they graduate.
The student who wishes me luck in finding an introvert at HBS no
doubt believes that there are none to be found. But clearly he
doesn’t know his first-year classmate Don Chen. I first meet Don in
Spangler, where he’s seated only a few couches away from the road-
trip planners. He comes across as a typical HBS student, tall, with
gracious manners, prominent cheekbones, a winsome smile, and a
fashionably choppy, surfer-dude haircut. He’d like to find a job in
private equity when he graduates. But talk to Don for a while and
you’ll notice that his voice is softer than those of his classmates, his
head ever so slightly cocked, his grin a little tentative. Don is “a
bitter introvert,” as he cheerfully puts it—bitter because the more
time he spends at HBS, the more convinced he becomes that he’d
better change his ways.
Don likes having a lot of time to himself, but that’s not much of
an option at HBS. His day begins early in the morning, when he
meets for an hour and a half with his “Learning Team”—a pre-
assigned study group in which participation is mandatory (students
at HBS practically go to the bathroom in teams). He spends the rest
of the morning in class, where ninety students sit together in a
wood-paneled, U-shaped amphitheater with stadium seating. The
professor usually kicks off by directing a student to describe the
case study of the day, which is based on a real-life business scenario
—say, a CEO who’s considering changing her company’s salary
structure. The figure at the heart of the case study, in this case the
CEO, is referred to as the “protagonist.” If you were the protagonist,
the professor asks—and soon you will be, is the implication—what
would you do?
The essence of the HBS education is that leaders have to act
confidently and make decisions in the face of incomplete
information. The teaching method plays with an age-old question: If
you don’t have all the facts—and often you won’t—should you wait
to act until you’ve collected as much data as possible? Or, by
hesitating, do you risk losing others’ trust and your own
momentum? The answer isn’t obvious. If you speak firmly on the
basis of bad information, you can lead your people into disaster. But
if you exude uncertainty, then morale suffers, funders won’t invest,
and your organization can collapse.
The HBS teaching method implicitly comes down on the side of
certainty. The CEO may not know the best way forward, but she
has to act anyway. The HBS students, in turn, are expected to opine.
Ideally, the student who was just cold-called has already discussed
the case study with his Learning Team, so he’s ready to hold forth
on the protagonist’s best moves. After he finishes, the professor
encourages other students to offer their own views. Half of the
students’ grade, and a much larger percentage of their social status,
is based on whether they throw themselves into this fray. If a
student talks often and forcefully, then he’s a player; if he doesn’t,
he’s on the margins.
Many of the students adapt easily to this system. But not Don. He
has trouble elbowing his way into class discussions; in some classes
he barely speaks at all. He prefers to contribute only when he
believes he has something insightful to add, or honest-to-God
disagrees with someone. This sounds reasonable, but Don feels as if
he should be more comfortable talking just so he can fill up his
share of available airtime.
Don’s HBS friends, who tend to be thoughtful, reflective types
like him, spend a lot of time talking about talking in class. How
much class participation is too much? How little is too little? When
does publicly disagreeing with a classmate constitute healthy
debate, and when does it seem competitive and judgmental? One of
Don’s friends is worried because her professor sent around an e-mail
saying that anyone with real-world experience on the day’s case
study should let him know in advance. She’s sure that the
professor’s announcement was an effort to limit stupid remarks like
the one she made in class last week. Another worries that he’s not
loud enough. “I just have a naturally soft voice,” he says, “so when
my voice sounds normal to others, I feel like I’m shouting. I have to
work on it.”
The school also tries hard to turn quiet students into talkers. The
professors have their own “Learning Teams,” in which they egg
each other on with techniques to draw out reticent students. When
students fail to speak up in class, it’s seen not only as their own
deficit but also as their professor’s. “If someone doesn’t speak by
the end of the semester, it’s problematic,” Professor Michel Anteby
told me. “It means I didn’t do a good job.”
The school even hosts live informational sessions and web pages
on how to be a good class participator. Don’s friends earnestly reel
off the tips they remember best.
“Speak with conviction. Even if you believe something only fifty-
five percent, say it as if you believe it a hundred percent.”
“If you’re preparing alone for class, then you’re doing it wrong.
Nothing at HBS is intended to be done alone.”
“Don’t think about the perfect answer. It’s better to get out there
and say something than to never get your voice in.”
The school newspaper, The Harbus, also dispenses advice,
featuring articles with titles like “How to Think and Speak Well—
On the Spot!,” “Developing Your Stage Presence,” and “Arrogant or
Simply Confident?”
These imperatives extend beyond the classroom. After class, most
people eat lunch at the Spangler dining hall, which one grad
describes as “more like high school than high school.” And every
day, Don wrestles with himself. Should he go back to his apartment
and recharge over a quiet lunch, as he longs to do, or join his
classmates? Even if he forces himself to go to Spangler, it’s not as if
the social pressure will end there. As the day wears on, there will be
more such dilemmas. Attend the late-afternoon happy hours? Head
out for a late, rowdy evening? Students at HBS go out in big groups
several nights a week, says Don. Participation isn’t mandatory, but
it feels as if it is to those who don’t thrive on group activities.
“Socializing here is an extreme sport,” one of Don’s friends tells
me. “People go out all the time. If you don’t go out one night, the
next day people will ask, ‘Where were you?’ I go out at night like
it’s my job.” Don has noticed that the people who organize social
events—happy hours, dinners, drinking fests—are at the top of the
social hierarchy. “The professors tell us that our classmates are the
people who will go to our weddings,” says Don. “If you leave HBS
without having built an extensive social network, it’s like you failed
your HBS experience.”
By the time Don falls into bed at night, he’s exhausted. And
sometimes he wonders why, exactly, he should have to work so
hard at being outgoing. Don is Chinese-American, and recently he
worked a summer job in China. He was struck by how different the
social norms were, and how much more comfortable he felt. In
China there was more emphasis on listening, on asking questions
rather than holding forth, on putting others’ needs first. In the
United States, he feels, conversation is about how effective you are
at turning your experiences into stories, whereas a Chinese person
might be concerned with taking up too much of the other person’s
time with inconsequential information.
“That summer, I said to myself, ‘Now I know why these are my
people,’ ” he says.
But that was China, this is Cambridge, Massachusetts. And if one
judges HBS by how well it prepares students for the “real world,” it
seems to be doing an excellent job. After all, Don Chen will
graduate into a business culture in which verbal fluency and
sociability are the two most important predictors of success,
according to a Stanford Business School study. It’s a world in which
a middle manager at GE once told me that “people here don’t even
want to meet with you if you don’t have a PowerPoint and a ‘pitch’
for them. Even if you’re just making a recommendation to your
colleague, you can’t sit down in someone’s office and tell them what
you think. You have to make a presentation, with pros and cons and
a ‘takeaway box.’ ”
Unless they’re self-employed or able to telecommute, many adults
work in offices where they must take care to glide down the
corridors greeting their colleagues warmly and confidently. “The
business world,” says a 2006 article from the Wharton Program for
Working Professionals, “is filled with office environments similar to
one described by an Atlanta area corporate trainer: ‘Here everyone
knows that it’s important to be an extrovert and troublesome to be
an introvert. So people work real hard at looking like extroverts,
whether that’s comfortable or not. It’s like making sure you drink
the same single-malt scotch the CEO drinks and that you work out
at the right health club.’ ”
Even businesses that employ many artists, designers, and other
imaginative types often display a preference for extroversion. “We
want to attract creative people,” the director of human resources at
a major media company told me. When I asked what she meant by
“creative,” she answered without missing a beat. “You have to be
outgoing, fun, and jazzed up to work here.”
Contemporary ads aimed at businesspeople would give the
Williams Luxury Shaving Cream ads of yesteryear a run for their
money. One line of TV commercials that ran on CNBC, the cable
business channel, featured an office worker losing out on a plum
assignment.
BOSS TO TED AND ALICE. Ted, I’m sending Alice to the sales conference because she
thinks faster on her feet than you.
TED. (speechless) …
BOSS. So, Alice, we’ll send you on Thursday—
TED. She does not!
Other ads explicitly sell their products as extroversion-enhancers.
In 2000, Amtrak encouraged travelers to “ .”
DEPART FROM YOUR INHIBITIONS
Nike became a prominent brand partly on the strength of its “Just
Do It” campaign. And in 1999 and 2000, a series of ads for the
psychotropic drug Paxil promised to cure the extreme shyness
known as “social anxiety disorder” by offering Cinderella stories of
personality transformation. One Paxil ad showed a well-dressed
executive shaking hands over a business deal. “I can taste success,”
read the caption. Another showed what happens without the drug: a
businessman alone in his office, his forehead resting dejectedly on a
clenched fist. “I should have joined in more often,” it read.
Yet even at Harvard Business School there are signs that something
might be wrong with a leadership style that values quick and
assertive answers over quiet, slow decision-making.
Every autumn the incoming class participates in an elaborate role-
playing game called the Subarctic Survival Situation. “It is
approximately 2:30 p.m., October 5,” the students are told, “and
you have just crash-landed in a float plane on the east shore of
Laura Lake in the subarctic region of the northern Quebec-
Newfoundland border.” The students are divided into small groups
and asked to imagine that their group has salvaged fifteen items
from the plane—a compass, sleeping bag, axe, and so on. Then
they’re told to rank them in order of importance to the group’s
survival. First the students rank the items individually; then they do
so as a team. Next they score those rankings against an expert’s to
see how well they did. Finally they watch a videotape of their
team’s discussions to see what went right—or wrong.
The point of the exercise is to teach group synergy. Successful
synergy means a higher ranking for the team than for its individual
members. The group fails when any of its members has a better
ranking than the overall team. And failure is exactly what can
happen when students prize assertiveness too highly.
One of Don’s classmates was in a group lucky to include a young
man with extensive experience in the northern backwoods. He had a
lot of good ideas about how to rank the fifteen salvaged items. But
his group didn’t listen, because he expressed his views too quietly.
“Our action plan hinged on what the most vocal people
suggested,” recalls the classmate. “When the less vocal people put
out ideas, those ideas were discarded. The ideas that were rejected
would have kept us alive and out of trouble, but they were
dismissed because of the conviction with which the more vocal
people suggested their ideas. Afterwards they played us back the
videotape, and it was so embarrassing.”
The Subarctic Survival Situation may sound like a harmless game
played inside the ivory tower, but if you think of meetings you’ve
attended, you can probably recall a time—plenty of times—when
the opinion of the most dynamic or talkative person prevailed to the
detriment of all. Perhaps it was a low-stakes situation—your PTA,
say, deciding whether to meet on Monday or Tuesday nights. But
maybe it was important: an emergency meeting of Enron’s top
brass, considering whether or not to disclose questionable
accounting practices. (See chapter 7 for more on Enron.) Or a jury
deliberating whether or not to send a single mother to jail.
I discussed the Subarctic Survival Situation with HBS professor
Quinn Mills, an expert on leadership styles. Mills is a courteous man
dressed, on the day we met, in a pinstriped suit and yellow polka-
dot tie. He has a sonorous voice, and uses it skillfully. The HBS
method “presumes that leaders should be vocal,” he told me fiat
out, “and in my view that’s part of reality.”
But Mills also pointed to the common phenomenon known as the
“winner’s curse,” in which two companies bid competitively to
acquire a third, until the price climbs so high that it becomes less an
economic activity than a war of egos. The winning bidders will be
damned if they’ll let their opponents get the prize, so they buy the
target company at an inflated price. “It tends to be the assertive
people who carry the day in these kinds of things,” says Mills. “You
see this all the time. People ask, ‘How did this happen, how did we
pay so much?’ Usually it’s said that they were carried away by the
situation, but that’s not right. Usually they’re carried away by
people who are assertive and domineering. The risk with our
students is that they’re very good at getting their way. But that
doesn’t mean they’re going the right way.”
If we assume that quiet and loud people have roughly the same
number of good (and bad) ideas, then we should worry if the louder
and more forceful people always carry the day. This would mean
that an awful lot of bad ideas prevail while good ones get squashed.
Yet studies in group dynamics suggest that this is exactly what
happens. We perceive talkers as smarter than quiet types—even
though grade-point averages and SAT and intelligence test scores
reveal this perception to be inaccurate. In one experiment in which
two strangers met over the phone, those who spoke more were
considered more intelligent, better looking, and more likable. We
also see talkers as leaders. The more a person talks, the more other
group members direct their attention to him, which means that he
becomes increasingly powerful as a meeting goes on. It also helps to
speak fast; we rate quick talkers as more capable and appealing
than slow talkers.
All of this would be fine if more talking were correlated with
greater insight, but research suggests that there’s no such link. In
one study, groups of college students were asked to solve math
problems together and then to rate one another’s intelligence and
judgment. The students who spoke first and most often were
consistently given the highest ratings, even though their suggestions
(and math SAT scores) were no better than those of the less
talkative students. These same students were given similarly high
ratings for their creativity and analytical powers during a separate
exercise to develop a business strategy for a start-up company.
A well-known study out of UC Berkeley by organizational
behavior professor Philip Tetlock found that television pundits—
that is, people who earn their livings by holding forth confidently
on the basis of limited information—make worse predictions about
political and economic trends than they would by random chance.
And the very worst prognosticators tend to be the most famous and
the most confident—the very ones who would be considered natural
leaders in an HBS classroom.
The U.S. Army has a name for a similar phenomenon: “the Bus to
Abilene.” “Any army officer can tell you what that means,” Colonel
(Ret.) Stephen J. Gerras, a professor of behavioral sciences at the
U.S. Army War College, told Yale Alumni Magazine in 2008. “It’s
about a family sitting on a porch in Texas on a hot summer day, and
somebody says, ‘I’m bored. Why don’t we go to Abilene?’ When
they get to Abilene, somebody says, ‘You know, I didn’t really want
to go.’ And the next person says, ‘I didn’t want to go—I thought you
wanted to go,’ and so on. Whenever you’re in an army group and
somebody says, ‘I think we’re all getting on the bus to Abilene
here,’ that is a red flag. You can stop a conversation with it. It is a
very powerful artifact of our culture.”
The “Bus to Abilene” anecdote reveals our tendency to follow
those who initiate action—any action. We are similarly inclined to
empower dynamic speakers. One highly successful venture capitalist
who is regularly pitched by young entrepreneurs told me how
frustrated he is by his colleagues’ failure to distinguish between
good presentation skills and true leadership ability. “I worry that
there are people who are put in positions of authority because
they’re good talkers, but they don’t have good ideas,” he said. “It’s
so easy to confuse schmoozing ability with talent. Someone seems
like a good presenter, easy to get along with, and those traits are
rewarded. Well, why is that? They’re valuable traits, but we put too
much of a premium on presenting and not enough on substance and
critical thinking.”
In his book Iconoclast, the neuroeconomist Gregory Berns explores
what happens when companies rely too heavily on presentation
skills to weed out good ideas from nonstarters. He describes a
software company called Rite-Solutions that successfully asks
employees to share ideas through an online “idea market,” as a way
of focusing on substance rather than style. Joe Marino, president of
Rite-Solutions, and Jim Lavoie, CEO of the company, created this
system as a reaction to problems they’d experienced elsewhere. “In
my old company,” Lavoie told Berns, “if you had a great idea, we
would tell you, ‘OK, we’ll make an appointment for you to address
the murder board’ ”—a group of people charged with vetting new
ideas. Marino described what happened next:
Some technical guy comes in with a good idea. Of course questions are asked of
that person that they don’t know. Like, “How big’s the market? What’s your
marketing approach? What’s your business plan for this? What’s the product
going to cost?” It’s embarrassing. Most people can’t answer those kinds of
questions. The people who made it through these boards were not the people
with the best ideas. They were the best presenters.
Contrary to the Harvard Business School model of vocal
leadership, the ranks of effective CEOs turn out to be filled with
introverts, including Charles Schwab; Bill Gates; Brenda Barnes,
CEO of Sara Lee; and James Copeland, former CEO of Deloitte
Touche Tohmatsu. “Among the most effective leaders I have
encountered and worked with in half a century,” the management
guru Peter Drucker has written, “some locked themselves into their
office and others were ultra-gregarious. Some were quick and
impulsive, while others studied the situation and took forever to
come to a decision.… The one and only personality trait the
effective ones I have encountered did have in common was
something they did not have: they had little or no ‘charisma’ and
little use either for the term or what it signifies.” Supporting
Drucker’s claim, Brigham Young University management professor
Bradley Agle studied the CEOs of 128 major companies and found
that those considered charismatic by their top executives had bigger
salaries but not better corporate performance.
We tend to overestimate how outgoing leaders need to be. “Most
leading in a corporation is done in small meetings and it’s done at a
distance, through written and video communications,” Professor
Mills told me. “It’s not done in front of big groups. You have to be
able to do some of that; you can’t be a leader of a corporation and
walk into a room full of analysts and turn white with fear and
leave. But you don’t have to do a whole lot of it. I’ve known a lot of
leaders of corporations who are highly introspective and who really
have to make themselves work to do the public stuff.”
Mills points to Lou Gerstner, the legendary chairman of IBM. “He
went to school here,” he says. “I don’t know how he’d characterize
himself. He has to give big speeches, and he does, and he looks
calm. But my sense is that he’s dramatically more comfortable in
small groups. Many of these guys are, actually. Not all of them. But
an awful lot of them.”
Indeed, according to a famous study by the influential
management theorist Jim Collins, many of the best-performing
companies of the late twentieth century were run by what he calls
“Level 5 Leaders.” These exceptional CEOs were known not for
their flash or charisma but for extreme humility coupled with
intense professional will. In his influential book Good to Great,
Collins tells the story of Darwin Smith, who in his twenty years as
head of Kimberly-Clark turned it into the leading paper company in
the world and generated stock returns more than four times higher
than the market average.
Smith was a shy and mild-mannered man who wore J.C. Penney
suits and nerdy black-rimmed glasses, and spent his vacations
puttering around his Wisconsin farm by himself. Asked by a Wall
Street Journal reporter to describe his management style, Smith
stared back for an uncomfortably long time and answered with a
single word: “Eccentric.” But his soft demeanor concealed a fierce
resolve. Soon after being appointed CEO, Smith made a dramatic
decision to sell the mills that produced the company’s core business
of coated paper and invest instead in the consumer-paper-products
industry, which he believed had better economics and a brighter
future. Everyone said this was a huge mistake, and Wall Street
downgraded Kimberly-Clark’s stock. But Smith, unmoved by the
crowd, did what he thought was right. As a result, the company
grew stronger and soon outpaced its rivals. Asked later about his
strategy, Smith replied that he never stopped trying to become
qualified for the job.
Collins hadn’t set out to make a point about quiet leadership.
When he started his research, all he wanted to know was what
characteristics made a company outperform its competition. He
selected eleven standout companies to research in depth. Initially he
ignored the question of leadership altogether, because he wanted to
avoid simplistic answers. But when he analyzed what the highest-
performing companies had in common, the nature of their CEOs
jumped out at him. Every single one of them was led by an unassuming
man like Darwin Smith. Those who worked with these leaders tended
to describe them with the following words: quiet, humble, modest,
reserved, shy, gracious, mild-mannered, self-efiacing, understated.
The lesson, says Collins, is clear. We don’t need giant
personalities to transform companies. We need leaders who build
not their own egos but the institutions they run.
So what do introverted leaders do differently from—and sometimes
better than—extroverts?
One answer comes from the work of Wharton management
professor Adam Grant, who has spent considerable time consulting
with Fortune 500 executives and military leaders—from Google to
the U.S. Army and Navy. When we first spoke, Grant was teaching
at the Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, where
he’d become convinced that the existing research, which showed a
correlation between extroversion and leadership, didn’t tell the
whole story.
Grant told me about a wing commander in the U.S. Air Force—
one rank below general, in command of thousands of people,
charged with protecting a high-security missile base—who was one
of the most classically introverted people, as well as one of the
finest leaders, Grant had ever met. This man lost focus when he
interacted too much with people, so he carved out time for thinking
and recharging. He spoke quietly, without much variation in his
vocal inflections or facial expressions. He was more interested in
listening and gathering information than in asserting his opinion or
dominating a conversation.
He was also widely admired; when he spoke, everyone listened.
This was not necessarily remarkable—if you’re at the top of the
military hierarchy, people are supposed to listen to you. But in the
case of this commander, says Grant, people respected not just his
formal authority, but also the way he led: by supporting his
employees’ efforts to take the initiative. He gave subordinates input
into key decisions, implementing the ideas that made sense, while
making it clear that he had the final authority. He wasn’t concerned
with getting credit or even with being in charge; he simply assigned
work to those who could perform it best. This meant delegating
some of his most interesting, meaningful, and important tasks—
work that other leaders would have kept for themselves.
Why did the research not reflect the talents of people like the
wing commander? Grant thought he knew what the problem was.
First, when he looked closely at the existing studies on personality
and leadership, he found that the correlation between extroversion
and leadership was modest. Second, these studies were often based
on people’s perceptions of who made a good leader, as opposed to
actual results. And personal opinions are often a simple reflection of
cultural bias.
But most intriguing to Grant was that the existing research didn’t
differentiate among the various kinds of situations a leader might
face. It might be that certain organizations or contexts were better
suited to introverted leadership styles, he thought, and others to
extroverted approaches, but the studies didn’t make such
distinctions.
Grant had a theory about which kinds of circumstances would call
for introverted leadership. His hypothesis was that extroverted
leaders enhance group performance when employees are passive,
but that introverted leaders are more effective with proactive
employees. To test his idea, he and two colleagues, professors
Francesca Gino of Harvard Business School and David Hofman of
the Kenan-Flagler Business School at the University of North
Carolina, carried out a pair of studies of their own.
In the first study, Grant and his colleagues analyzed data from
one of the five biggest pizza chains in the United States. They
discovered that the weekly profits of the stores managed by
extroverts were 16 percent higher than the profits of those led by
introverts—but only when the employees were passive types who
tended to do their job without exercising initiative. Introverted leaders
had the exact opposite results. When they worked with employees
who actively tried to improve work procedures, their stores
outperformed those led by extroverts by more than 14 percent.
In the second study, Grant’s team divided 163 college students
into competing teams charged with folding as many T-shirts as
possible in ten minutes. Unbeknownst to the participants, each team
included two actors. In some teams, the two actors acted passively,
following the leader’s instructions. In other teams, one of the actors
said, “I wonder if there’s a more efficient way to do this.” The other
actor replied that he had a friend from Japan who had a faster way
to fold shirts. “It might take a minute or two to teach you,” the
actor told the leader, “but do we want to try it?”
The results were striking. The introverted leaders were 20
percent more likely to follow the suggestion—and their teams had
24 percent better results than the teams of the extroverted leaders.
When the followers were not proactive, though—when they simply
did as the leader instructed without suggesting their own shirt-
folding methods—the teams led by extroverts outperformed those
led by the introverts by 22 percent.
Why did these leaders’ effectiveness turn on whether their
employees were passive or proactive? Grant says it makes sense
that introverts are uniquely good at leading initiative-takers.
Because of their inclination to listen to others and lack of interest in
dominating social situations, introverts are more likely to hear and
implement suggestions. Having benefited from the talents of their
followers, they are then likely to motivate them to be even more
proactive. Introverted leaders create a virtuous circle of proactivity,
in other words. In the T-shirt-folding study, the team members
reported perceiving the introverted leaders as more open and
receptive to their ideas, which motivated them to work harder and
to fold more shirts.
Extroverts, on the other hand, can be so intent on putting their
own stamp on events that they risk losing others’ good ideas along
the way and allowing workers to lapse into passivity. “Often the
leaders end up doing a lot of the talking,” says Francesca Gino, “and
not listening to any of the ideas that the followers are trying to
provide.” But with their natural ability to inspire, extroverted
leaders are better at getting results from more passive workers.
This line of research is still in its infancy. But under the auspices
of Grant—an especially proactive fellow himself—it may grow
quickly. (One of his colleagues has described Grant as the kind of
person who “can make things happen twenty-eight minutes before
they’re scheduled to begin.”) Grant is especially excited about the
implications of these findings because proactive employees who
take advantage of opportunities in a fast-moving, 24/7 business
environment, without waiting for a leader to tell them what to do,
are increasingly vital to organizational success. To understand how
to maximize these employees’ contributions is an important tool for
all leaders. It’s also important for companies to groom listeners as
well as talkers for leadership roles.
The popular press, says Grant, is full of suggestions that
introverted leaders practice their public speaking skills and smile
more. But Grant’s research suggests that in at least one important
regard—encouraging employees to take initiative—introverted
leaders would do well to go on doing what they do naturally.
Extroverted leaders, on the other hand, “may wish to adopt a more
reserved, quiet style,” Grant writes. They may want to learn to sit
down so that others might stand up.
Which is just what a woman named Rosa Parks did naturally.
For years before the day in December 1955 when Rosa Parks
refused to give up her seat on a Montgomery bus, she worked
behind the scenes for the NAACP, even receiving training in
nonviolent resistance. Many things had inspired her political
commitment. The time the Ku Klux Klan marched in front of her
childhood house. The time her brother, a private in the U.S. Army
who’d saved the lives of white soldiers, came home from World
War II only to be spat upon. The time a black eighteen-year-old
delivery boy was framed for rape and sent to the electric chair.
Parks organized NAACP records, kept track of membership
payments, read to little kids in her neighborhood. She was diligent
and honorable, but no one thought of her as a leader. Parks, it
seemed, was more of a foot soldier.
Not many people know that twelve years before her showdown
with the Montgomery bus driver, she’d had another encounter with
the same man, possibly on the very same bus. It was a November
afternoon in 1943, and Parks had entered through the front door of
the bus because the back was too crowded. The driver, a well-
known bigot named James Blake, told her to use the rear and
started to push her off the bus. Parks asked him not to touch her.
She would leave on her own, she said quietly. “Get off my bus,”
Blake sputtered in response.
Parks complied, but not before deliberately dropping her purse on
her way out and sitting on a “white” seat as she picked it up.
“Intuitively, she had engaged in an act of passive resistance, a
precept named by Leo Tolstoy and embraced by Mahatma Gandhi,”
writes the historian Douglas Brinkley in a wonderful biography of
Parks. It was more than a decade before King popularized the idea
of nonviolence and long before Parks’s own training in civil
disobedience, but, Brinkley writes, “such principles were a perfect
match for her own personality.”
Parks was so disgusted by Blake that she refused to ride his bus
for the next twelve years. On the day she finally did, the day that
turned her into the “Mother of the Civil Rights Movement,” she got
back on that bus, according to Brinkley, only out of sheer
absentmindedness.
Parks’s actions that day were brave and singular, but it was in the
legal fallout that her quiet strength truly shone. Local civil rights
leaders sought her out as a test case to challenge the city’s bus laws,
pressing her to file a lawsuit. This was no small decision. Parks had
a sickly mother who depended on her; to sue would mean losing her
job and her husband’s. It would mean running the very real risk of
being lynched from “the tallest telephone pole in town,” as her
husband and mother put it. “Rosa, the white folks will kill you,”
pleaded her husband. “It was one thing to be arrested for an
isolated bus incident,” writes Brinkley; “it was quite another, as
historian Taylor Branch would put it, to ‘reenter that forbidden zone
by choice.’ ”
But because of her nature, Parks was the perfect plaintiff. Not
only because she was a devout Christian, not only because she was
an upstanding citizen, but also because she was gentle. “They’ve
messed with the wrong one now!” the boycotters would declare as
they traipsed miles to work and school. The phrase became a
rallying cry. Its power lay in how paradoxical it was. Usually such a
phrase implies that you’ve messed with a local heavy, with some
bullying giant. But it was Parks’s quiet strength that made her
unassailable. “The slogan served as a reminder that the woman who
had inspired the boycott was the sort of soft-spoken martyr God
would not abandon,” writes Brinkley.
Parks took her time coming to a decision, but ultimately agreed
to sue. She also lent her presence at a rally held on the evening of
her trial, the night when a young Martin Luther King Jr., the head
of the brand-new Montgomery Improvement Association, roused all
of Montgomery’s black community to boycott the buses. “Since it
had to happen,” King told the crowd, “I’m happy it happened to a
person like Rosa Parks, for nobody can doubt the boundless
outreach of her integrity. Nobody can doubt the height of her
character. Mrs. Parks is unassuming, and yet there is integrity and
character there.”
Later that year Parks agreed to go on a fund-raising speaking tour
with King and other civil rights leaders. She suffered insomnia,
ulcers, and homesickness along the way. She met her idol, Eleanor
Roosevelt, who wrote of their encounter in her newspaper column:
“She is a very quiet, gentle person and it is difficult to imagine how
she ever could take such a positive and independent stand.” When
the boycott finally ended, over a year later, the buses integrated by
decree of the Supreme Court, Parks was overlooked by the press.
The New York Times ran two front-page stories that celebrated King
but didn’t mention her. Other papers photographed the boycott
leaders sitting in front of buses, but Parks was not invited to sit for
these pictures. She didn’t mind. On the day the buses were
integrated, she preferred to stay home and take care of her mother.
Parks’s story is a vivid reminder that we have been graced with
limelight-avoiding leaders throughout history. Moses, for example,
was not, according to some interpretations of his story, the brash,
talkative type who would organize road trips and hold forth in a
classroom at Harvard Business School. On the contrary, by today’s
standards he was dreadfully timid. He spoke with a stutter and
considered himself inarticulate. The book of Numbers describes him
as “very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the
earth.”
When God first appeared to him in the form of a burning bush,
Moses was employed as a shepherd by his father-in-law; he wasn’t
even ambitious enough to own his own sheep. And when God
revealed to Moses his role as liberator of the Jews, did Moses leap
at the opportunity? Send someone else to do it, he said. “Who am I,
that I should go to Pharaoh?” he pleaded. “I have never been
eloquent. I am slow of speech and tongue.”
It was only when God paired him up with his extroverted brother
Aaron that Moses agreed to take on the assignment. Moses would
be the speechwriter, the behind-the-scenes guy, the Cyrano de
Bergerac; Aaron would be the public face of the operation. “It will
be as if he were your mouth,” said God, “and as if you were God to
him.”
Complemented by Aaron, Moses led the Jews from Egypt,
provided for them in the desert for the next forty years, and
brought the Ten Commandments down from Mount Sinai. And he
did all this using strengths that are classically associated with
introversion: climbing a mountain in search of wisdom and writing
down carefully, on two stone tablets, everything he learned there.
We tend to write Moses’ true personality out of the Exodus story.
(Cecil B. DeMille’s classic, The Ten Commandments, portrays him as
a swashbuckling figure who does all the talking, with no help from
Aaron.) We don’t ask why God chose as his prophet a stutterer with
a public speaking phobia. But we should. The book of Exodus is
short on explication, but its stories suggest that introversion plays
yin to the yang of extroversion; that the medium is not always the
message; and that people followed Moses because his words were
thoughtful, not because he spoke them well.
If Parks spoke through her actions, and if Moses spoke through his
brother Aaron, today another type of introverted leader speaks
using the Internet.
In his book The Tipping Point, Malcolm Gladwell explores the
influence of “Connectors”—people who have a “special gift for
bringing the world together” and “an instinctive and natural gift for
making social connections.” He describes a “classic Connector”
named Roger Horchow, a charming and successful businessman and
backer of Broadway hits such as Les Misérables, who “collects people
the same way others collect stamps.” “If you sat next to Roger
Horchow on a plane ride across the Atlantic,” writes Gladwell, “he
would start talking as the plane taxied to the runway, you would be
laughing by the time the seatbelt sign was turned off, and when you
landed at the other end you’d wonder where the time went.”
We generally think of Connectors in just the way that Gladwell
describes Horchow: chatty, outgoing, spellbinding even. But
consider for a moment a modest, cerebral man named Craig
Newmark. Short, balding, and bespectacled, Newmark was a
systems engineer for seventeen years at IBM. Before that, he had
consuming interests in dinosaurs, chess, and physics. If you sat next
to him on a plane, he’d probably keep his nose buried in a book.
Yet Newmark also happens to be the founder and majority owner
of Craigslist, the eponymous website that—well—connects people
with each other. As of May 28, 2011, Craigslist was the seventh-
largest English language website in the world. Its users in over 700
cities in seventy countries find jobs, dates, and even kidney donors
on Newmark’s site. They join singing groups. They read one
another’s haikus. They confess their affairs. Newmark describes the
site not as a business but as a public commons.
“Connecting people to fix the world over time is the deepest
spiritual value you can have,” Newmark has said. After Hurricane
Katrina, Craigslist helped stranded families find new homes. During
the New York City transit strike of 2005, Craigslist was the go-to
place for ride-share listings. “Yet another crisis, and Craigslist
commands the community,” wrote one blogger about Craigslist’s
role in the strike. “How come Craig organically can touch lives on
so many personal levels—and Craig’s users can touch each other’s
lives on so many levels?”
Here’s one answer: social media has made new forms of
leadership possible for scores of people who don’t fit the Harvard
Business School mold.
On August 10, 2008, Guy Kawasaki, the best-selling author,
speaker, serial entrepreneur, and Silicon Valley legend, tweeted,
“You may find this hard to believe, but I am an introvert. I have a
‘role’ to play, but I fundamentally am a loner.” Kawasaki’s tweet set
the world of social media buzzing. “At the time,” wrote one
blogger, “Guy’s avatar featured him wearing a pink boa from a
large party he threw at his house. Guy Kawasaki an introvert? Does
not compute.”
On August 15, 2008, Pete Cashmore, the founder of Mashable,
the online guide to social media, weighed in. “Wouldn’t it be a great
irony,” he asked, “if the leading proponents of the ‘it’s about people’
mantra weren’t so enamored with meeting large groups of people in
real life? Perhaps social media affords us the control we lack in real
life socializing: the screen as a barrier between us and the world.”
Then Cashmore outed himself. “Throw me firmly in the ‘introverts’
camp with Guy,” he posted.
Studies have shown that, indeed, introverts are more likely than
extroverts to express intimate facts about themselves online that
their family and friends would be surprised to read, to say that they
can express the “real me” online, and to spend more time in certain
kinds of online discussions. They welcome the chance to
communicate digitally. The same person who would never raise his
hand in a lecture hall of two hundred people might blog to two
thousand, or two million, without thinking twice. The same person
who finds it difficult to introduce himself to strangers might
establish a presence online and then extend these relationships into
the real world.
What would have happened if the Subarctic Survival Situation had
been conducted online, with the benefit of all the voices in the room
—the Rosa Parkses and the Craig Newmarks and the Darwin
Smiths? What if it had been a group of proactive castaways led by
an introvert with a gift for calmly encouraging them to contribute?
What if there had been an introvert and an extrovert sharing the
helm, like Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King Jr.? Might they have
reached the right result?
It’s impossible to say. No one has ever run these studies, as far as
I know—which is a shame. It’s understandable that the HBS model
of leadership places such a high premium on confidence and quick
decision-making. If assertive people tend to get their way, then it’s
a useful skill for leaders whose work depends on influencing others.
Decisiveness inspires confidence, while wavering (or even
appearing to waver) can threaten morale.
But one can take these truths too far; in some circumstances
quiet, modest styles of leadership may be equally or more effective.
As I left the HBS campus, I stopped by a display of notable Wall
Street Journal cartoons in the Baker Library lobby. One showed a
haggard executive looking at a chart of steeply falling profits.
“It’s all because of Fradkin,” the executive tells his colleague. “He
has terrible business sense but great leadership skills, and everyone
is following him down the road to ruin.”
Does God Love Introverts? An Evangelical’s Dilemma
If Harvard Business School is an East Coast enclave for the global
elite, my next stop was an institution that’s much the opposite. It
sits on a sprawling, 120-acre campus in the former desert and
current exurb of Lake Forest, California. Unlike Harvard Business
School, it admits anyone who wants to join. Families stroll the
palm-tree-lined plazas and walkways in good-natured clumps.
Children frolic in man-made streams and waterfalls. Staff wave
amiably as they cruise by in golf carts. Wear whatever you want:
sneakers and fiip-fiops are perfectly fine. This campus is presided
over not by nattily attired professors wielding words like protagonist
and case method, but by a benign Santa Claus–like figure in a
Hawaiian shirt and sandy-haired goatee.
With an average weekly attendance of 22,000 and counting,
Saddleback Church is one of the largest and most influential
evangelical churches in the nation. Its leader is Rick Warren, author
of The Purpose Driven Life, one of the best-selling books of all time,
and the man who delivered the invocation at President Obama’s
inauguration. Saddleback doesn’t cater to world-famous leaders the
way HBS does, but it plays no less mighty a role in society.
Evangelical leaders have the ear of presidents; dominate thousands
of hours of TV time; and run multimillion-dollar businesses, with
the most prominent boasting their own production companies,
recording studios, and distribution deals with media giants like
Time Warner.
Saddleback also has one more thing in common with Harvard
Business School: its debt to—and propagation of—the Culture of
Personality.
It’s a Sunday morning in August 2006, and I’m standing at the
center of a dense hub of sidewalks on Saddleback’s campus. I
consult a signpost, the kind you see at Walt Disney World, with
cheerful arrows pointing every which way: Worship Center, Plaza
Room, Terrace Café, Beach Café. A nearby poster features a
beaming young man in bright red polo shirt and sneakers: “Looking
for a new direction? Give traffic ministry a try!”
I’m searching for the open-air bookstore, where I’ll be meeting
Adam McHugh, a local evangelical pastor with whom I’ve been
corresponding. McHugh is an avowed introvert, and we’ve been
having a cross-country conversation about what it feels like to be a
quiet and cerebral type in the evangelical movement—especially as
a leader. Like HBS, evangelical churches often make extroversion a
prerequisite for leadership, sometimes explicitly. “The priest must
be … an extrovert who enthusiastically engages members and
newcomers, a team player,” reads an ad for a position as associate
rector of a 1,400-member parish. A senior priest at another church
confesses online that he has advised parishes recruiting a new rector
to ask what his or her Myers-Briggs score is. “If the first letter isn’t
an ‘E’ [for extrovert],” he tells them, “think twice … I’m sure our
Lord was [an extrovert].”
McHugh doesn’t fit this description. He discovered his
introversion as a junior at Claremont McKenna College, when he
realized he was getting up early in the morning just to savor time
alone with a steaming cup of coffee. He enjoyed parties, but found
himself leaving early. “Other people would get louder and louder,
and I would get quieter and quieter,” he told me. He took a Myers-
Briggs personality test and found out that there was a word,
introvert, that described the type of person who likes to spend time
as he did.
At first McHugh felt good about carving out more time for
himself. But then he got active in evangelicalism and began to feel
guilty about all that solitude. He even believed that God
disapproved of his choices and, by extension, of him.
“The evangelical culture ties together faithfulness with
extroversion,” McHugh explained. “The emphasis is on community,
on participating in more and more programs and events, on meeting
more and more people. It’s a constant tension for many introverts
that they’re not living that out. And in a religious world, there’s
more at stake when you feel that tension. It doesn’t feel like ‘I’m
not doing as well as I’d like.’ It feels like ‘God isn’t pleased with
me.’ ”
From outside the evangelical community, this seems an
astonishing confession. Since when is solitude one of the Seven
Deadly Sins? But to a fellow evangelical, McHugh’s sense of
spiritual failure would make perfect sense. Contemporary
evangelicalism says that every person you fail to meet and
proselytize is another soul you might have saved. It also emphasizes
building community among confirmed believers, with many
churches encouraging (or even requiring) their members to join
extracurricular groups organized around every conceivable subject
—cooking, real-estate investing, skateboarding. So every social
event McHugh left early, every morning he spent alone, every
group he failed to join, meant wasted chances to connect with
others.
But, ironically, if there was one thing McHugh knew, it was that
he wasn’t alone. He looked around and saw a vast number of people
in the evangelical community who felt just as conflicted as he did.
He became ordained as a Presbyterian minister and worked with a
team of student leaders at Claremont College, many of whom were
introverts. The team became a kind of laboratory for experimenting
with introverted forms of leadership and ministry. They focused on
one-on-one and small group interactions rather than on large
groups, and McHugh helped the students find rhythms in their lives
that allowed them to claim the solitude they needed and enjoyed,
and to have social energy left over for leading others. He urged
them to find the courage to speak up and take risks in meeting new
people.
A few years later, when social media exploded and evangelical
bloggers started posting about their experiences, written evidence
of the schism between introverts and extroverts within the
evangelical church finally emerged. One blogger wrote about his
“cry from the heart wondering how to fit in as an introvert in a
church that prides itself on extroverted evangelism. There are
probably quite a few [of you] out there who are put on guilt trips
each time [you] get a personal evangelism push at church. There’s a
place in God’s kingdom for sensitive, reflective types. It’s not easy
to claim, but it’s there.” Another wrote about his simple desire “to
serve the Lord but not serve on a parish committee. In a universal
church, there should be room for the un-gregarious.”
McHugh added his own voice to this chorus, first with a blog
calling for greater emphasis on religious practices of solitude and
contemplation, and later with a book called Introverts in the Church:
Finding Our Place in an Extroverted Culture. He argues that
evangelism means listening as well as talking, that evangelical
churches should incorporate silence and mystery into religious
worship, and that they should make room for introverted leaders
who might be able to demonstrate a quieter path to God. After all,
hasn’t prayer always been about contemplation as well as
community? Religious leaders from Jesus to Buddha, as well as the
lesser-known saints, monks, shamans, and prophets, have always
gone off alone to experience the revelations they later shared with
the rest of us.
When finally I find my way to the bookstore, McHugh is waiting
with a serene expression on his face. He’s in his early thirties, tall
and broad-shouldered, dressed in jeans, a black polo shirt, and black
fiip-fiops. With his short brown hair, reddish goatee, and sideburns,
McHugh looks like a typical Gen Xer, but he speaks in the soothing,
considered tones of a college professor. McHugh doesn’t preach or
worship at Saddleback, but we’ve chosen to meet here because it’s
such an important symbol of evangelical culture.
Since services are just about to start, there’s little time to chat.
Saddleback offers six different “worship venues,” each housed in its
own building or tent and set to its own beat: Worship Center,
Traditional, OverDrive Rock, Gospel, Family, and something called
Ohana Island Style Worship. We head to the main Worship Center,
where Pastor Warren is about to preach. With its sky-high ceiling
crisscrossed with klieg lights, the auditorium looks like a rock
concert venue, save for the unobtrusive wooden cross hanging on
the side of the room.
A man named Skip is warming up the congregation with a song.
The lyrics are broadcast on five Jumbotron screens, interspersed
with photos of shimmering lakes and Caribbean sunsets. Miked-up
tech guys sit on a thronelike dais at the center of the room, training
their video cameras on the audience. The cameras linger on a
teenage girl—long, silky blond hair, electric smile, and shining blue
eyes—who’s singing her heart out. I can’t help but think of Tony
Robbins’s “Unleash the Power Within” seminar. Did Tony base his
program on megachurches like Saddleback, I wonder, or is it the
other way around?
“Good morning, everybody!” beams Skip, then urges us to greet
those seated near us. Most people oblige with wide smiles and glad
hands, including McHugh, but there’s a hint of strain beneath his
smile.
Pastor Warren takes the stage. He’s wearing a short-sleeved polo
shirt and his famous goatee. Today’s sermon will be based on the
book of Jeremiah, he tells us. “It would be foolish to start a
business without a business plan,” Warren says, “but most people
have no life plan. If you’re a business leader, you need to read the
book of Jeremiah over and over, because he was a genius CEO.”
There are no Bibles at our seats, only pencils and note cards, with
the key points from the sermon preprinted, and blanks to fill in as
Warren goes along.
Like Tony Robbins, Pastor Warren seems truly well-meaning; he’s
created this vast Saddleback ecosystem out of nothing, and he’s
done good works around the world. But at the same time I can see
how hard it must be, inside this world of Luau worship and
Jumbotron prayer, for Saddleback’s introverts to feel good about
themselves. As the service wears on, I feel the same sense of
alienation that McHugh has described. Events like this don’t give
me the sense of oneness others seem to enjoy; it’s always been
private occasions that make me feel connected to the joys and
sorrows of the world, often in the form of communion with writers
and musicians I’ll never meet in person. Proust called these
moments of unity between writer and reader “that fruitful miracle
of a communication in the midst of solitude.” His use of religious
language was surely no accident.
McHugh, as if reading my mind, turns to me when the service is
over. “Everything in the service involved communication,” he says
with gentle exasperation. “Greeting people, the lengthy sermon, the
singing. There was no emphasis on quiet, liturgy, ritual, things that
give you space for contemplation.”
McHugh’s discomfort is all the more poignant because he
genuinely admires Saddleback and all that it stands for. “Saddleback
is doing amazing things around the world and in its own
community,” he says. “It’s a friendly, hospitable place that
genuinely seeks to connect with newcomers. That’s an impressive
mission given how colossal the church is, and how easy it would be
for people to remain completely disconnected from others. Greeters,
the informal atmosphere, meeting people around you—these are all
motivated by good desires.”
Yet McHugh finds practices like the mandatory smile-and-good-
morning at the start of the service to be painful—and though he
personally is willing to endure it, even sees the value in it, he
worries about how many other introverts will not.
“It sets up an extroverted atmosphere that can be difficult for
introverts like me,” he explains. “Sometimes I feel like I’m going
through the motions. The outward enthusiasm and passion that
seems to be part and parcel of Saddleback’s culture doesn’t feel
natural. Not that introverts can’t be eager and enthusiastic, but
we’re not as overtly expressive as extroverts. At a place like
Saddleback, you can start questioning your own experience of God.
Is it really as strong as that of other people who look the part of the
devout believer?”
Evangelicalism has taken the Extrovert Ideal to its logical
extreme, McHugh is telling us. If you don’t love Jesus out loud,
then it must not be real love. It’s not enough to forge your own
spiritual connection to the divine; it must be displayed publicly. Is it
any wonder that introverts like Pastor McHugh start to question
their own hearts?
It’s brave of McHugh, whose spiritual and professional calling
depends on his connection to God, to confess his self-doubt. He does
so because he wants to spare others the inner conflict he has
struggled with, and because he loves evangelicalism and wants it to
grow by learning from the introverts in its midst.
But he knows that meaningful change will come slowly to a
religious culture that sees extroversion not only as a personality
trait but also as an indicator of virtue. Righteous behavior is not so
much the good we do behind closed doors when no one is there to
praise us; it is what we “put out into the world.” Just as Tony
Robbins’s aggressive upselling is OK with his fans because spreading
helpful ideas is part of being a good person, and just as HBS expects
its students to be talkers because this is seen as a prerequisite of
leadership, so have many evangelicals come to associate godliness
with sociability.