11 Upgrade Your Key Skills
The only certain means of success is to render more and better
service than is expected of you, no matter what your task may be.
OG MANDINO
Upgrading your skills is one of the most important personal productivity
principles of all. Learn what you need to learn so that you can do your work in
an excellent fashion. The better you become at eating a particular type of frog,
the more likely you are to just plunge in and get it done.
A major reason for procrastination is a feeling of inadequacy, a lack of
confidence, or an inability in a key area of a task. Feeling weak or deficient in a
single area is enough to discourage you from starting the job at all.
Continually upgrade your skills in your key result areas. Remember, however
good you are today, your knowledge and skills are becoming obsolete at a rapid
rate. As Pat Riley, the basketball coach, said, “Anytime you stop striving to get
better, you’re bound to get worse.”
Never Stop Learning
One of the most helpful of all time management techniques is for you to get
better at your key tasks. Personal and professional improvement is one of the
best time savers there is. The better you are at a key task, the more motivated
you are to launch into it. The better you are, the more energy and enthusiasm
you have. When you know that you can do a job well, you find it easier to
overcome procrastination and get the job done faster and better than under any
other circumstances.
One piece of information or one additional skill can make an enormous
difference in your ability to do the job well. Identify the most important things
you do, and then make a plan to continually upgrade your skills in those areas.

Rule: Continuous learning is the minimum requirement for success in any field.
Refuse to allow a weakness or a lack of ability in any area to hold you back.
Everything is learnable. And what others have learned, you can learn as well.
When I began to write my first book, I was discouraged because I could use
only the hunt-and-peck method of typing. I soon realized that I had to learn to
touch-type if I was ever going to write and rewrite a 300-page book. So I bought
a touch-typing program for my computer and practiced for twenty to thirty
minutes every day for three months. By the end of that time, I was typing forty
to fifty words per minute. With this additional skill, I have been able to write
more than seventy-five books that have now been published all over the world.
The best news is that you can learn whatever skills you need to be more
productive and more effective. You can become a touch typist if necessary. You
can become proficient with a computer. You can become a terrific negotiator or
a super salesperson. You can learn to speak in public. You can learn to write
effectively and well. These are all skills you can acquire as soon as you decide to
and make them a priority.
Three Steps to Mastery
First, read in your field for at least one hour every day. Get up a little earlier in
the morning and read for thirty to sixty minutes in a book or magazine that
contains information that can help you be more effective and productive at what
you do.
Second, take every course and seminar available on the key skills that can
help you. Attend the conventions and business meetings of your profession or
occupation. Go to the sessions and workshops. Sit up front and take notes.
Purchase the audio recordings of the programs. Dedicate yourself to becoming
one of the most knowledgeable and competent people in your field.
Third, listen to audio programs in your car. The average car owner sits behind
the wheel 500 to 1,000 hours each year while driving from place to place. Turn
driving time into learning time. You can become one of the smartest, most
capable, and highest paid people in your field simply by listening to educational
audio programs as you drive from place to place.
The more you learn and know, the more confident and motivated you feel.
The better you become, the more capable you will be of doing even more in your
field.
The more you learn, the more you can learn. Just as you can build your
physical muscles through physical exercise, you can build your mental muscles

physical muscles through physical exercise, you can build your mental muscles
with mental exercises. And there is no limit to how far or how fast you can
advance except for the limits you place on your own imagination.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Identify the key skills that can help you the most to achieve better and
faster results. Determine the core competencies that you will need to have
in the future to lead your field. Whatever they are, set a goal, make a plan,
and begin developing and increasing your ability in those areas. Decide to
be the very best at what you do!
2. Develop a personal plan to prepare yourself to do your most important
tasks in an excellent fashion. Focus on those areas where you have special
talents and that you most enjoy. This is the key to unlocking your personal
potential.