A Note on the Words Introvert and Extrovert
This book is about introversion as seen from a cultural point of
view. Its primary concern is the age-old dichotomy between the
“man of action” and the “man of contemplation,” and how we could
improve the world if only there were a greater balance of power
between the two types. It focuses on the person who recognizes
him- or herself somewhere in the following constellation of
attributes: reflective, cerebral, bookish, unassuming, sensitive,
thoughtful, serious, contemplative, subtle, introspective, inner-
directed, gentle, calm, modest, solitude-seeking, shy, risk-averse,
thin-skinned. Quiet is also about this person’s opposite number: the
“man of action” who is ebullient, expansive, sociable, gregarious,
excitable, dominant, assertive, active, risk-taking, thick-skinned,
outer-directed, lighthearted, bold, and comfortable in the spotlight.
These are broad categories, of course. Few individuals identify
fully with only one or the other. But most of us recognize these
types immediately, because they play meaningful roles in our
culture.
Contemporary personality psychologists may have a conception
of introversion and extroversion that differs from the one I use in
this book. Adherents of the Big Five taxonomy often view such
characteristics as the tendency to have a cerebral nature, a rich
inner life, a strong conscience, some degree of anxiety (especially
shyness), and a risk-averse nature as belonging to categories quite
separate from introversion. To them, these traits may fall under
“openness to experience,” “conscientiousness,” and “neuroticism.”
My use of the word introvert is deliberately broader, drawing on
the insights of Big Five psychology, but also encompassing Jungian
thinking on the introvert’s inner world of “inexhaustible charm” and
subjective experience; Jerome Kagan’s research on high reactivity
and anxiety (see chapters 4 and 5); Elaine Aron’s work on sensory
processing sensitivity and its relationship to conscientiousness,
intense feeling, inner-directedness, and depth of processing (see
chapter 6); and various research on the persistence and
concentration that introverts bring to problem-solving, much of it
summarized wonderfully in Gerald Matthews’s work (see chapter
7).
Indeed, for over three thousand years, Western culture has linked
the qualities in the above constellations of adjectives. As the
anthropologist C. A. Valentine once wrote:
Western cultural traditions include a conception of individual variability which
appears to be old, widespread, and persistent. In popular form this is the familiar
notion of the man of action, practical man, realist, or sociable person as opposed
to the thinker, dreamer, idealist, or shy individual. The most widely used labels
associated with this tradition are the type designations extrovert and introvert.
Valentine’s concept of introversion includes traits that contemporary
psychology would classify as openness to experience (“thinker,
dreamer”), conscientiousness (“idealist”), and neuroticism (“shy
individual”).
A long line of poets, scientists, and philosophers have also tended
to group these traits together. All the way back in Genesis, the
earliest book of the Bible, we had cerebral Jacob (a “quiet man
dwelling in tents” who later becomes “Israel,” meaning one who
wrestles inwardly with God) squaring off in sibling rivalry with his
brother, the swashbuckling Esau (a “skillful hunter” and “man of the
field”). In classical antiquity, the physicians Hippocrates and Galen
famously proposed that our temperaments—and destinies—were a
function of our bodily fluids, with extra blood and “yellow bile”
making us sanguine or choleric (stable or neurotic extroversion),
and an excess of phlegm and “black bile” making us calm or
melancholic (stable or neurotic introversion). Aristotle noted that
the melancholic temperament was associated with eminence in
philosophy, poetry, and the arts (today we might classify this as
openness to experience). The seventeenth-century English poet John
Milton wrote Il Penseroso (“The Thinker”) and L’Allegro (“The Merry
One”), comparing “the happy person” who frolics in the countryside
and revels in the city with “the thoughtful person” who walks
meditatively through the nighttime woods and studies in a “lonely
Towr.” (Again, today the description of Il Penseroso would apply not
only to introversion but also to openness to experience and
neuroticism.) The nineteenth-century German philosopher
Schopenhauer contrasted “good-spirited” people (energetic, active,
and easily bored) with his preferred type, “intelligent people”
(sensitive, imaginative, and melancholic). “Mark this well, ye proud
men of action!” declared his countryman Heinrich Heine. “Ye are,
after all, nothing but unconscious instruments of the men of
thought.”
Because of this definitional complexity, I originally planned to
invent my own terms for these constellations of traits. I decided
against this, again for cultural reasons: the words introvert and
extrovert have the advantage of being well known and highly
evocative. Every time I uttered them at a dinner party or to a
seatmate on an airplane, they elicited a torrent of confessions and
reflections. For similar reasons, I’ve used the layperson’s spelling of
extrovert rather than the extravert one finds throughout the research
literature.