CHAPTER 4
Build It Before You Need It
Build a little community of those you love and who love you.
—MITCH ALBOM
Forget the images we all have in our heads of the desperate,
out-of-work individuals scooping up every business card in
sight while fervently mingling at business conventions and job-
hunting events. The great myth of "networking" is that you start
reaching out to others only when you need something like a job.
In reality, people who have the largest circle of contacts, mentors,
and friends know that you must reach out to others long before
you need anything at all.
George, for example, is a smart guy in his twenties who
was introduced to me through a mutual friend. George worked in
public relations in New York and aspired to start his own PR
business. He asked me to lunch one day looking for advice and
encouragement.
Ten minutes after we sat down, I knew he was on the wrong
track.
"Have you started to reach out to potential clients?" I asked.
"No," he told me. "I'm taking it step by step. My plan is to work
my way up in my current company to a point where I can afford
to leave. Then I'll incorporate, get an office, and start searching for
my first customers. I don't want to start meeting with potential
clients until I can present myself as a credible PR person with my
own firm."
"You've got it totally backwards," I told him. "You're setting
yourself up for failure."
My advice was to start finding future clients today. Had he
thought about what kind of industry he wanted to specialize in?
Had he thought about where the top people in that industry hang
out? Once he could answer those questions, the next step was to
go hang with this new circle of people.
"The most important thing is to get to know these people
as friends, not potential customers," I said. "Though you're right
about one thing: No matter how friendly you are, if the people
you approach are any good at what they do, they won't hire you
right off the bat to do their PR. Which is why you should offer
your services for free—at least at first. For instance, maybe you
can volunteer your time to a nonprofit organization they're
involved in, or aid in publicizing a school fundraiser their kids
are involved in."
"But won't my employer be angry at my expending so much
energy on other things?" George asked.
"Doing good work for your employer comes first," I told him.
"Finding time to manage your outside work is your responsibility.
Concentrate on an industry that your present employer doesn't
service. Remember, if you haven't done the necessary legwork on
the day you decide to open your own business, you'll be back at
your old job in no time flat."
"So I should work for these people for/ree?"
"Absolutely," I said. "Today you are unproven, and breaking in
is tough. Eventually you'll have a growing circle of people who
have seen your work and who believe in you. That's the kind of
connections you're looking to create if you're going to start a busi
ness, or if you're looking to change jobs or careers.
"At some point, while you're still working for your current
employer, start looking to turn one of your contacts into a real,
paying client. Once you've got an established client that will pro
vide references and create some word-of-mouth, you're halfway
home. Then, and only then, is it time to go back to your company
and ask to go half time, or better yet, turn them into your second
big client. If you quit at that point, you've hedged your bets. You
have a group of people who will help transition you into a new
career."
The last half hour of our lunch was spent thinking about all
the people he already knew who could help him get started. I
offered a name or two from my own network, and George's confi
dence started to soar. I'm confident that now, when he reaches
out, his interactions won't be tainted by desperation. He'll be
looking for ways to help others, and everyone can benefit from a
little bit of that.
The ideas behind starting a business aren't that different from
the ideas that will make you a hot commodity within your com
pany—not to mention give you job security. I know that's hard to
believe given the current job environment. According to a recent
study of business school programs, the percentage of MBAs in
2004 who were without a job three months after graduation
tripled from the year before to an alarming 20 percent. Scores
of people are out of work or living in dread that the ax will fall
on their heads. A blizzard of pink slips has convinced job seekers
that they must do more than scan the help-wanted ads or send
resumes.
Too often, we get caught up efficiently doing ineffective things,
focusing solely on the work that will get us through the day. The
idea isn't to find oneself another environment tomorrow—be it a
new job or a new economy—but to be constantly creating the
environment and community you want for yourself, no matter
what may occur.
Creating such a community, however, is not a short-term solu
tion or one-off activity only to be used when necessary. The
dynamics of building a relationship is necessarily incremental.
You can only truly gain someone's trust and commitment little by
little over time.
Right now, there are countless ways you can begin to create the
kind of community that can help further your career. You can: (1)
create a company-approved project that will force you to learn
new skills and introduce you to new people within your company;
(2) take on leadership positions in the hobbies and outside organ
izations that interest you; (3) join your local alumni club and
spend time with people who are doing the jobs you'd like to be
doing; (4) enroll in a class at a community college on a subject
that relates to either the job you're doing now or a job you see
yourself doing in the future.
All of these suggestions will help you meet new people. And
the law of probability ensures that the more new people you
know, the more opportunities will come your way and the more
help you'll get at critical junctures in your career.
My first year in business school, I started consulting with my
friend Tad Smith, who is now President of the Media Division at
the large magazine publishing company Reed Business Informa
tion. The idea wasn't to create a sustainable consulting company
that we would run after school. Instead, we wanted to offer our
knowledge and work ethic to small companies for cut-rate prices.
In exchange, we'd learn about new industries, gain real-world
skills, and have a list of references and contacts when we gradu
ated, as well as make some ready cash.
What about the world you inhabit right now? Are you making
the most of the connections you already have?
Imagine, for a moment, that all your family and friends and
associates are a part of a garden. Take a stroll through that rela
tionship garden. What do you see?
If you're like most people, you see a tiny parcel of cleanly cut
grass that represents the usual suspects of an ordinary Rolodex. It
consists of your immediate friends, coworkers, and business part
ners: the most obvious people.
Your real network, however, is an overgrown jungle with an
infinite variety of hidden nooks and crannies that are being neg
lected.
Your potential for connecting is at this moment far bigger than
you realize. All around you are golden opportunities to develop
relationships with people you know, who know people you don't
know, who know even more people.
There are a number of things that you can do to harness the
power of your preexisting network. Have you investigated the
friends and contacts of your parents? How about your siblings?
Your friends from college and grad school? What about your
church, bowling league, or gym? How about your doctor or lawyer
or realtor or broker?
In business, we often say that your best customers are the cus
tomers you have now. In other words, your most successful sales
leads come from the selling you've already done. The highest
returns don't come from new sales; they come on top of the cus
tomer base you've already established. It's easiest to reach out to
those people who are at least tangentially part of your network.
The big hurdles of networking revolve around the cold calls,
meeting of new people, and all the activities that involve engaging
the unknown. But the first step has nothing to do with strangers;
you should start connecting with the people you do know.
Focus on your immediate network: friends of friends, old
acquaintances from school, and family. I suspect you've never
asked your cousins, brothers, or brothers-in-law if they know any
one that they could introduce you to to help fulfill your goals.
Everyone from your family to your mailman is a portal to an
entirely new set of folks.
So don't wait until you're out of a job, or on your own, to begin
reaching out to others. You've got to create a community of col
leagues and friends before you need it. Others around you are far
more likely to help you if they already know and like you. Start
gardening now. You won't believe the treasures to be found within
your own backyard.