CHAPTER 31
Welcome to the Connected Age
We human beings are social beings. We come into the world as
the result of others' actions. We survive here in dependence on
others. Whether we like it or not, there is hardly a moment of our
lives when we do not benefit from others' activities. For this rea
son, it is hardly surprising that most of our happiness arises in
the context of our relationships with others.
—DALAI LAMA
There has never been a better time to reach out and connect
than right now. The dynamic of our society, and particularly
our economy, will increasingly be defined by interdependence and
interconnectivity. In other words, the more everything becomes
connected to everything and everyone else, the more we begin to
depend on whom and what we're connected with.
Rugged individualism may have ruled for much of the nine
teenth and twentieth century. But community and alliances will
rule in the twenty-first century. In the digital era, when the Inter
net has broken down geographic boundaries and connected hun
dreds of millions of people and computers around the world,
there's no reason to live and work in isolation. We've come to real
ize, again, that success is not contingent on cool technology or
venture capital; it's dependent on whom you know and how you
work with them. We've rediscovered that the real key to profit is
working well with other people.
We've taken some lumps getting back to this fundamental
truth. All the changes, all the fads, all the technologies of the last
decade too often foundered on the human factor, leading the busi-
ness world to treat people less as human beings than as just so
many bits and bytes. We placed our faith in gadgets, processes, new
organizational structures, stock market prices. When these things
didn't deliver on their promise, we returned to us, you, and me.
Life is about work, work is about life, and both are about people.
"The most exciting breakthrough of the twenty-first century will
occur not because of technology, but because of an expanding
concept of what it means to be human," said the futurist John
Naisbitt. Technology has proved no substitute for personal rela
tionships. To the contrary, it seems to be enhancing them. Look
around you and you'll see this expanded view of what it means to
be human, and how we interact with one another, in action. Here's
just a small sampling:
• The hottest trend these days is found in social-networking
software tools, and services like Spoke Software, Plaxo, and
Linkedln. People are now finding new ways to use technology
to connect people with bonds of trust and friendship. Some
are calling it a social revolution.
• Blogs, part of the same phenomenon, are allowing passionate
individuals with good content to reach literally millions of
other people. These self-sustaining communities are flourish
ing. In the future, as personal branding continues to solidify
itself as a mainstay in the economy, blogs will become as ubiq
uitous as resumes.
• Social scientists are making remarkable discoveries about the
power of social networks. Recent research findings are proving
that people who are more connected with other people live
longer and are healthier. In communities where people are
connected, the schools work better, the crime rate is lower, the
economic growth rate is higher. Bringing people together by
building personal relationships is becoming far more than a
career strategy; it's increasingly regarded as one of the most
effective ways to enhance America's civic and social health.
• Old-style labor unions and guilds are showing signs of revital-
ization. As the outsourcing of jobs outside the United States
continues, and more and more of us become free agents,
Americans are finding strength in membership to something
larger than themselves. We're giving our loyalty and our trust
not to companies but to our peers.
That's just a small taste of what's to come. We are in the for
mative stages of a new era of connectivity and community. You
now have the skills and knowledge to thrive in this environment.
But to what end? How will you thrive? What does it mean to live a
truly connected life?
Certainly, some of us will tally success in terms of income and
promotions. Others will cite their newfound celebrity or the excit
ing expertise that they've amassed. For others still, it will be the
fabulous dinner parties they throw or the aspirational contacts
they've befriended.
But will such success feel empty? Instead of being surrounded
by a loving family and a trusted circle of friends, will you only
have colleagues and clients?
Sooner or later, in one way or another, we all will ask ourselves
these questions. Moreover, we'll look back on our life and wonder,
What is my legacy? What have I done that is meaningful?
How many of you can recall the names of the last three CEOs of
General Motors, IBM, or Wal-Mart? Are you struggling to come up
with names? Now try and recall three important figures in the Civil
Rights Movement. Ah, here people usually can name six or more.
Ultimately, making your mark as a connector means making a
contribution—to your friends and family, to your company, to
your community, and most important, to the world—by making
the best use of your contacts and talents.
It's funny what events in life will make you question where
you're headed and what you value most. I remember as a young
man, for instance, dreaming of owning my own Brooks Brothers
button-down shirt. All throughout my years growing up, I wore
hand-me-downs from my mom's cleaning customers' kids or I'd
find my clothes in secondhand thrift shops. I thought that when
the day came that I could walk into a shop like Brooks Brothers
and buy my own firsthand shirt (for retail!), well, that would be
the day I arrived.
That day came. I was in my mid-twenties and I proudly bought
the finest, most expensive button-down shirt Brooks Brothers
sold. The next day I wore that shirt into work as if it were a rare,
emerald-studded gown from the Victorian era. Then I washed it. I
remember pulling my shirt from the washer and—gasp!—two
buttons had fallen off. I kid you not. This, I asked myself, is what
I've been waiting for all my life?
As noted author and speaker Rabbi Harold Kushner once
wisely wrote, "Our souls are not hungry for fame, comfort, wealth,
or power. Those rewards create almost as many problems as they
solve. Our souls are hungry for meaning, for the sense that we have
figured out how to live so that our lives matter so the world will at
least be a little bit different for our having passed through it."
But it would take many more missing buttons before I truly
started to ask myself what meaning, exactly, my soul was hungry for.
That time finally came with what I call my own personal mini-
revolution. Revolutions sometimes begin in the least likely of
places with the least likely of heroes. Who could imagine that a
small Indian man with a very strong accent could challenge what
I wanted out of life and how I was going to attain it? Or that doing
nothing and remaining silent for ten days, rather than trying to do
everything all at once, could change the course of my life?
The first shot in my revolution happened, in all places, while I
was in Switzerland for The World Economic Forum, attending an
oversubscribed talk entitled, simply, "Happiness." The room was
jam-packed with the world's rich and powerful—a clear indica
tion that there were others in my midst who had experienced a
few missing buttons of their own.
We were gathered together to hear a short, stout, and thor
oughly happy-looking man named S. N. Goenka deliver a speech
on how he, as a businessman-turned-guru, found health and hap
piness through an ancient tradition of meditation known as
Vipassana.
Goenka slowly shuffled to the podium and launched into a talk
that enraptured the entire audience for the next hour. With his
words, we were all transported into our own heads, forced to con
front the feelings of inadequacy, stress, and imbalance that still
accompanied our seemingly successful lives.
Not a word was spoken about business, per se. There was no
talk of balance sheets or influential contacts. Happiness, he told
us, had nothing to do with how much money we made or how we
made it.
There is only one place to find real peace, real harmony. That
place is within, Goenka told us. And while we may be masters of
business, it was clear that we were not masters of our own minds
and souls.
There was a way, he said, to ask the right questions and become
masters of our mind. Vipassana, we were told, is an insight medi
tation technique that means "to see things as they really are."
It was a technology for inner peace that could drive fear from
the heart and help us have the courage to be who we really are.
Goenka described a grueling ten-day course, during which practi
tioners sit for hours-long stretches in absolute silence, without eye
contact, writing, or communication of any kind except with
teachers at the end of each day.
It was up to us. No, it was within us to live a happy and mean
ingful life. We just had to ask the right questions and spend the
time looking and listening.
While I'm not sure how many of my fellow executives were
intent on learning Vipassana, it was clear that Goenka had
touched us... deeply. He made us feel, at least for that moment,
that we had the power to make our work and lives mean some
thing, that it could be important, that it could make a difference,
and that we could learn to be happy if only we took the time to lis
ten to what our souls were telling us.
I left refreshed and inspired, but I was sure that I would never
learn Vipassana. Ten days with no conference calls, no power
lunches, no talking . . . ten DAYS! Impossible. I could never find
the time.
Then, suddenly, I had all the time in the world. After my depar
ture from Starwood, one too many buttons had gone missing and
I was in need of clarity—and happiness.
Until that moment, I thought I didn't have enough time, or
courage, for ten days of introspection. But eventually I took the
Vipassana course and learned, for what seemed the first time in
my life, to slow down and truly listen. In the process I shed
many—though not all—of the thoughts of what I "should" and
"ought" to be doing.
If you commit yourself to finding your passion, that blue
flame, it's interesting how that commitment is rewarded with
answers. The answers that came to me after all that meditation
helped me to reevaluate my pursuit of prestige and money and
refocus on what I've always known matters most: relationships.
Vipassana certainly isn't the only way to get clarity, but so few
of us give ourselves the time and space we need to come to a bet
ter understanding of who we are and what we really want. How
had I—along with so many other perfectly capable and intelligent
people I knew—allowed my life to get so far out of whack? By fail
ing to ask ourselves the kinds of questions that are the most
important: What is your passion? What truly gives you pleasure?
How can you make a difference?
When I left the meditation course and got back to the routine
of my life, I was like a kid in a candy store. There were so many
people I wanted to meet! So many people I wanted to help! The
pursuit of achievement could be, I realized, so much fun and so
inspiring when you knew what was worthy of achieving.
We've been taught to see life as a quest, a journey that ends
with, hopefully, meaning, love, and an IRA that will keep our
golden years golden. There is, however, no end, no final arrival;
the quest never quite ends. There is no one job title or one Brooks
Brothers shirt or one dollar amount that can ever act as the ulti
mate finishing line. Which is why the achievement of some goals
can feel as disappointing as failure.
Living a connected life leads one to take a different view. Life is
less a quest than a quilt. We find meaning, love, and prosperity
through the process of stitching together our bold attempts to
help others find their own way in their lives. The relationships we
weave become an exquisite and endless pattern.
There is a line in a lovely movie called How to Make an Ameri
can Quilt that sums up this philosophy nicely: "Young lovers seek
perfection. Old lovers sew shreds together and see beauty in the
multiplicity of patches."
What will be the legacy of your own quilt? How will you be
remembered? These questions are potent measuring sticks for
anyone who cares about making a difference, not just making a
living. There's nothing wrong with wanting to be the best in the
world, as long as you remember that doing so also means wanting
to be the best for the world.
Remember that love, reciprocity, and knowledge are not like
bank accounts that grow smaller as you use them. Creativity
begets more creativity, money begets more money, knowl
edge begets more knowledge, more friends beget more friends,
success begets even more success. Most important, giving begets
giving. At no time in history has this law of abundance been more
apparent than in this connected age where the world increasingly
functions in accord with networking principles.
Wherever you are in life right now, and whatever you know, is
a result of the ideas, experiences, and people you have interacted
with in your life, whether in person, through books and music,
e-mail, or culture. There is no score to keep when abundance leads
to even more abundance. So make a decision that from this day
forward you will start making the contacts and accumulating the
knowledge, experiences, and people to help you achieve your
goals.
But first be honest with yourself. How much time are you
ready to spend on reaching out and giving before you get? How
many mentors do you have? How many people have you men-
tored? What do you love to do? How do you want to live? Whom
do you want to be part of your quilt?
From my own experience, I can tell you the answers will come
as a surprise. What's important probably won't come down to a
job, a company, or a cool new piece of technology. It will come
down to people. It's up to each of us, working together with peo
ple we love, to make the world a world we want to live in. As the
anthropologist Margaret Mead once said, "Never doubt that a
small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the
world. Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has." It is my hope that
you have the tools to make that a reality. But you can't do it alone.
We are all in this together. Make your quilt count.