4 Consider the Consequences
Every great man has become great, every successful man has
succeeded, in proportion as he has confined his powers to one
particular channel.
ORISON SWETT MARDEN
The mark of the superior thinker is his or her ability to accurately predict the
consequences of doing or not doing something. The potential consequences of
any task or activity are the key determinants of how important a task really is to
you and to your company. This way of evaluating the significance of a task is
how you determine what your next frog really is.
Dr. Edward Banfield of Harvard University, after more than fifty years of
research, concluded that a “long time perspective” is the most accurate single
predictor of upward social and economic mobility in America. A long time
perspective turns out to be more important than family background, education,
race, intelligence, connections, or virtually any other single factor in determining
your success in life and at work.
Your attitude toward time, your “time horizon,” has an enormous impact on
your behavior and your choices. People who take a long-term view of their lives
and careers always seem to make much better decisions about their time and
activities than people who give very little thought to the future.
Rule: Long-term thinking improves short-term decision making.
Successful people have a clear future orientation. They think five, ten, and
twenty years out into the future. They analyze their choices and behaviors in the
present to make sure that what they are doing today is consistent with the long-
term future that they desire.
Make Better Decisions about Time
Make Better Decisions about Time
In your work, having a clear idea of what is really important to you in the long
term makes it much easier for you to make better decisions about your priorities
in the short term.
By definition, something that is important has long-term potential
consequences. Something that is unimportant has few or no long-term potential
consequences. Before starting on anything, you should always ask yourself,
“What are the potential consequences of doing or not doing this task?”
Rule: Future intent influences and often determines present actions.
The clearer you are about your future intentions, the greater influence that
clarity will have on what you do in the moment. With a clear long-term vision,
you are much more capable of evaluating an activity in the present to ensure that
it is consistent with where you truly want to end up.
Think about the Long Term
Successful people are those who are willing to delay gratification and make
sacrifices in the short term so that they can enjoy far greater rewards in the long
term. Unsuccessful people, on the other hand, think more about short-term
pleasure and immediate gratification while giving little thought to the long-term
future.
Denis Waitley, a motivational speaker, says, “Losers try to escape from their
fears and drudgery with activities that are tension-relieving. Winners are
motivated by their desires toward activities that are goal-achieving.”
For example, coming into work earlier, reading regularly in your field, taking
courses to improve your skills, and focusing on high-value tasks in your work
will all combine to have an enormous positive impact on your future. On the
other hand, coming into work at the last moment, reading the newspaper,
drinking coffee, and socializing with your coworkers may seem fun and
enjoyable in the short term but inevitably leads to lack of promotion,
underachievement, and frustration in the long term.
If a task or activity has large potential positive consequences, make it a top
priority and get started on it immediately. If something can have large potential
negative consequences if it is not done quickly and well, that becomes a top
priority as well. Whatever your frog is, resolve to gulp it down first thing.
Motivation requires motive. The greater the potential positive impact that an
action or behavior of yours can have on your life, once you define it clearly, the
more motivated you will be to overcome procrastination and get it done quickly.
Keep yourself focused and forward moving by continually starting and
completing those tasks that can make a major difference to your company and to
your future.
The time is going to pass anyway. The only question is how you use it and
where you are going to end up at the end of the weeks and months that pass. And
where you end up is largely a matter of the amount of consideration you give to
the likely consequences of your actions in the short term.
Thinking continually about the potential consequences of your choices,
decisions, and behaviors is one of the very best ways to determine your true
priorities in your work and personal life.
Obey the Law of Forced Efficiency
The Law of Forced Efficiency says, “There is never enough time to do
everything, but there is always enough time to do the most important thing.” Put
another way, you cannot eat every tadpole and frog in the pond, but you can eat
the biggest and ugliest one, and that will be enough, at least for the time being.
When you’re running out of time and know that the consequences of not
completing a key task or project can be really serious, you always seem to find
the time to get it done, often at the very last minute. You start early, you stay
late, and you drive yourself to complete the job rather than face the
unpleasantness that would follow if you didn’t complete it within the time limit.
Rule: There will never be enough time to do everything you have to do.
The average person in business today, especially a manager in the age of
cutbacks, is working at 110 to 130 percent of capacity. And the jobs and
responsibilities just keep piling up. We all have stacks of reading material we
still have to go through. Many people have hundreds of hours of reading and
projects backlogged at home and at the office.
What this means is that you will never be caught up. Get that wishful idea out
of your mind. All you can hope for is to be on top of your most important
responsibilities. The others will just have to wait.
Deadlines Are an Excuse
Deadlines Are an Excuse
Many people say that they work better under the pressure of deadlines.
Unfortunately, years of research indicate that this is seldom true.1
Under the pressure of deadlines, often self-created through procrastination,
people suffer greater stress, make more mistakes, and have to redo more tasks
than under any other conditions. Often the mistakes that people make when
working under tight deadlines lead to defects and cost overruns that cause
substantial financial losses in the long term. Sometimes a job actually takes
much longer to complete when people rush to get it done at the last minute and
then have to redo it.
It is much better to plan your time carefully in advance and then build in a
sizable buffer to compensate for unexpected delays and diversions. However
much time you think a task will take, add on another 20 percent or more as
insurance. Or make a game of getting the job done well in advance of the
deadline. You will be amazed at how much more relaxed you are and how much
better a job you do when you are on top of your most important tasks.
Three Questions for Maximum Productivity
You can use three questions on a regular basis to keep yourself focused on
completing your most important tasks on schedule. The first question is, “What
are my highest-value activities?” Put another way, what are the biggest frogs
that you have to eat to make the greatest contribution to your organization? To
your family? To your life in general?
This is one of the most important questions you can ever ask and answer.
What are your highest-value activities? First, think this through for yourself.
Then, ask your boss. Ask your coworkers and subordinates. Ask your friends
and family. Like focusing the lens of a camera, you must be crystal clear about
your highest-value activities before you begin work.
The second question you can ask continually is, “What can I and only I do,
that if done well, will make a real difference?” This question came from the late
Peter Drucker, the management guru. It is one of the most important of all
questions for achieving personal effectiveness. What can you and only you do
that if done well can make a real difference?
This is something that only you can do. If you don’t do it, it won’t be done by
someone else. But if you do do it, and you do it well, it can really make a
difference to your life and your career. What is this particular frog for you?
Every hour of every day, you can ask yourself this question and come up with
a specific answer. Your job is to be clear about the answer and then to start and
a specific answer. Your job is to be clear about the answer and then to start and
work on this task before anything else.
The third question you can ask is, “What is the most valuable use of my time
right now?” In other words, “What is my biggest frog of all at this moment?”
This is the core question of time management. Answering this question
correctly is the key to overcoming procrastination and becoming a highly
productive person. Every hour of every day, one task represents the most
valuable use of your time at that moment. Your job is to ask yourself this
question, over and over again, and to always be working on the answer to it,
whatever it is.
Do first things first and second things not at all. As Goethe said, “The things
that matter most must never be at the mercy of the things that matter least.”
The more accurate your answers are to these three questions, the easier it will
be for you to set clear priorities, to overcome procrastination, and to get started
on that one activity that represents the most valuable use of your time.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Review your list of tasks, activities, and projects regularly. Continually
ask yourself, “Which one project or activity, if I did it in an excellent and
timely fashion, would have the greatest positive consequences in my work
or personal life?”
2. Determine the most important thing you could be doing every hour of
every day, and then discipline yourself to work continually on the most
valuable use of your time. What is this for you right now?
Whatever it is that can help you the most, set it as a goal, make a plan to
achieve it, and go to work on your plan immediately. Remember the
wonderful words of Goethe: “Only engage, and the mind grows heated.
Begin it, and the work will be completed.”