9 Prepare Thoroughly Before You Begin
No matter what the level of your ability, you have more potential
than you can ever develop in a lifetime.
JAMES T. MCCAY
One of the best ways for you to overcome procrastination and get more things
done faster is to have everything you need at hand before you begin. When you
are fully prepared, you are like a cocked gun or an archer with an arrow pulled
back taut in the bow. You will be amazed at what you achieve in the months and
years ahead. You just need one small mental push to get started on your highest-
value tasks.
This is like getting everything ready to prepare a complete meal. You set all
the ingredients out on the counter in front of you and then begin putting the meal
together, one step at a time.
Begin by clearing off your desk or workspace so that you have only one task
in front of you. If necessary, put everything else on the floor or on a table behind
you.
Gather all the information, reports, details, papers, and work materials that
you will require to complete the job. Have them at hand so you can reach them
without getting up or moving around. Be sure that you have all the writing
materials, log-in information, access codes, e-mail addresses, and everything
else you need to start working and continue working until the job is done.
Set up your work area so that it is comfortable, attractive, and conducive to
working for long periods. Especially, make sure that you have a comfortable
chair that supports your back and allows your feet to rest flat on the floor.
Create a Comfortable Workspace
The most productive people take the time to create a work area where they enjoy
spending time. The cleaner and neater you organize your work area before you
spending time. The cleaner and neater you organize your work area before you
begin, the easier it will be for you to get started and keep going.
When everything is laid out neatly and in sequence, you will feel much more
like getting on with the job.
It is amazing how many books never get written, how many degrees never get
completed, how many life-changing tasks never get started because people fail to
take the first step of preparing everything in advance.
Launch toward Your Dreams
Once you have completed your preparations, it is essential that you launch
immediately toward your goals. Get started. Do the first thing, whatever it is.
My personal rule is “Get it 80 percent right and then correct it later.” Run it
up the flagpole and see if anyone salutes. Don’t expect perfection the first time
or even the first few times. Be prepared to fail over and over before you get it
right.
Wayne Gretzky, the great hockey player, once said, “You miss 100 percent of
the shots you don’t take.” Once you have completed your preparations, have the
courage to take the first action, and everything else will follow from that. The
way you develop the courage you need is to act as if you already had the courage
and behave accordingly.
Take the First Step
When you sit down with everything in front of you, ready to go, assume the
body language of high performance. Sit up straight; sit forward and away from
the back of the chair. Carry yourself as though you were an efficient, effective,
high-performing personality. Then, pick up the first item and say to yourself,
“Let’s get to work!” and plunge in. And once you’ve started, keep going until
the job is finished.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Take a good look at your desk or office, both at home and at work. Ask
yourself, “What kind of a person works in an environment like this?” The
cleaner and neater your work environment, the more positive, productive,
and confident you will feel.
2. Resolve today to clean up your desk and office completely so that you
feel effective, efficient, and ready to get going each time you sit down to
work.