CHAPTER 21
Find Anchor Tenants and Feed Them
When I was an insolvent student working his way through
business school, my apartment wasn't what you'd call a
spotless designer residence. Minimal, yes. A bit grungy, definitely.
Still, it never stopped me from throwing outrageously fun dinner
parties where I enjoyed the company of good friends—and a few
strangers.
It was in those days that I learned how powerful the art of
throwing dinner parties could be in creating wonderful memories
and strengthening relationships in the process. Today I can safely
say my strongest links have been forged at the table. The compan
ionable effects of breaking bread—not to mention drinking a few
glasses of wine—bring people together.
In those early years, my 400-square-foot, one-bedroom apart
ment opposite the football field, with a kitchen table that could
barely seat two adults, held wild get-togethers for four, six, even
fifteen guests. The mix was always a diverse medley of professors,
students, Boston locals, and, sometimes, a person I met in line
while checking out groceries. I never thought twice about some of
the minor inconveniences those impoverished days bestowed on
my events, like forcing my guests to eat with plates in their laps.
For all the sheer delight and good times a dinner party can
impart, it seems our fast-food culture has diminished our cen
turies-old belief in the power of a shared meal in your own home
to comfort, nurture, and connect people. Some people seem to
think it's too hard, too time-consuming. The only image they have
of a dinner party is of those grandly ornate occasions once
glamorized by Martha Stewart, a friend by the way. Maybe those
female-hosted TV shows are, perhaps, another reason why men,
in particular, have forgotten the virtues of hosting a simple dinner
gathering. They think it's feminine. But trust me, guys, you can
serve a fine meal in your home and still be masculine—and, if
you're single, it will do a world of good for your dating lives.
Nearly once a month an array of different people from differ
ent worlds gathers at my home in Los Angeles or hotel suite in
New York or a friend's home in San Francisco to have fun, talk
business, and meet new people. But I learned the art of throwing
these events back in my dingy Cambridge apartment.
Before my dinner parties had any cachet, I had to develop a
deliberate strategy for attracting a good mix of people that would
expand my social horizons and get a reputation that would keep
people coming back.
You, me, every one of us—we have an established peer set. But
if you only have dinner parties with the same people, your circle
of relationships will never grow. At the same time, we're con
fronted with a small obstacle. Randomly inviting strangers, espe
cially strangers who hold a level of prestige and experience above
your own peer set, is rarely effective. These people want to hang
around people of their own background, experience, or social
status.
Parents tend to stay away from their children's gatherings
unless they expect other parents to be in attendance as well. In col
lege, juniors and seniors avoid the parties populated solely by
freshmen and sophomores. In the adult world, it's no different. Go
to any cafeteria at any major corporation in the country. You'll
generally find each strata of the organization—from the adminis
trative staff on up to the executive suite—congregating in their
own cliques to eat their lunches.
To overcome this herd mentality and pull people into my din
ner parties that would otherwise not come, I developed a helpful
little concept I call the "anchor tenant."
Every individual within a particular peer set has a bridge to
someone outside his or her own group of friends. We all have, to
some degree or another, developed relationships with older, wiser,
more experienced people; they may be our mentors, our parents'
friends, our teachers, our rabbis and reverends, our bosses.
I call them anchor tenants; their value comes from the simple
fact that they are, in relation to one's core group of friends, differ
ent. They know different people, have experienced different
things, and thus, have much to teach.
Identifying and inviting an anchor tenant to your dinner party
isn't hard. Someone you know probably has access and is close
enough to such an individual that an invitation will be well
received. You'll discover who these people are by paying attention
to your friends' stories and taking notice of the one or two names
that continually pop up. They tend to be the names of people who
have had a positive influence on your friends' lives. And it stands
to reason that they can have the same effect on you.
Once you've identified a person outside your social circle and
successfully invited him or her to a dinner, here's an added little
nuance that pays terrific dividends. Landing an anchor tenant isn't
about entertaining your dinner-party regulars. They'll come no
matter what. But an anchor allows you to reach out beyond your
circle in subsequent invitations and pull in people who wouldn't
otherwise attend. To put it in terms of the company cafeteria, now
that you have the CEO eating lunch at the manager's table, other
executives will jump at the opportunity to eat at the table, too.
Frankly, anyone who can add a little electricity to your dinner
party is an anchor tenant. Journalists, I've found, are terrific
anchor guests. They aren't particularly well paid (which makes
them a sucker for a free meal), their profession has a good deal of
intrigue, they are always on the lookout for good material and see
such dinners as a potential venue for new ideas, they're generally
good conversationalists, and many folks enjoy an opportunity to
get their ideas heard by someone who might publicize them to a
larger audience. Artists and actors, famous or not, fall into the
same category. On those occasions when you can't land as big a
fish as you might have liked, you can try to pull in a person with
proximity to power: a political consultant to an interesting politi
cian, the COO of an interesting company under an interesting
CEO, and so on. In these cases, it's about brand association.
Once you've landed an anchor tenant, finding the right mix of
people is critical. For me, the invitation list needs to be a mix of
professional folks I want to do business with today, contacts I
aspire to do business with down the road, and those I call "light
attractors"—guests who are energetic, interesting, and willing to
speak their mind. Of course, a local celebrity or two never hurts.
And it goes without saying that you should have your friends and
family present, as well.
Political columnist Arianna Huffington is one of my favorite
dinner guests. She's gracious, fun, and always outspoken. How did
I land her? Through an intro from my friend Elana Weiss, who
knew someone in Arianna's office, I sent her an e-mail. I told her I
was a big admirer and that I threw these very fun dinner parties in
Los Angeles and she'd undoubtedly make them better. She showed
up only for cocktails at first, had a great time, and has become a
regular and a dear friend.
While these kinds of dinners can often cinch an important
business deal, be careful not to include too many business associ
ates on the invite list or business agendas in the discussion. Talk
ing about budgets and other management mumbo jumbo all the
time will ensure a dull evening. These events are about building
relationships.
Six to ten guests, I've found, is the optimal number to invite to
a dinner. I usually invite fourteen now, but that's after a lot of
practice. I also invite an extra six or so people to pop in before or
come after for drinks and dessert. This group should be closer
friends who won't get offended for not being at the main event
but will appreciate being part of the group nonetheless. Generally,
when you invite someone to dinner, you get a 20 to 30 percent
acceptance rate because of scheduling difficulties. When someone
says they cannot come because of another dinner or engagement,
I often suggest they come before the dinner for drinks and appe
tizers, or even after, for dessert and drinks.
These "bonus guests" will arrive a little before dinner has con
cluded. I'll have folding chairs at the ready so they can pull up next
to the dinner table, have dessert, and chat with the guests. Just
when most dinner parties tend to slip and people begin to look at
their watches thinking about what time they have to get up in the
morning, the energy level spikes with a whole new group. Sud
denly, the dinner turns raucous again.
At about this time, the music that's been playing on the stereo
gives way to a live piano player. I don't announce this. From the
dining room or deck where I serve dinner, guests slowly pick up
on the fact that the music coming from the living room has
changed. Sometimes it's not only the piano. I may hire a singer,
invite a bunch of young vocalists to come show off, or do a bit
more research and find out if there are some local alumni who
used to be part of Yale's renowned singing group, the Whiffen-
poofs. For a reasonable fee, the kids are happy to belt out a few old
tunes for an old alumnus.
As dessert is being served, the Poofs start singing. The after-
party guests arrive, and now the night is swinging. Some people
stay at the table, while others adjourn to the living room to sing
along and hang out. The next thing I know, it's one or two in the
morning and I'm closing down another successful event.
If you like to eat and you enjoy the company of others, you can
pull off your own version of a dinner party that will work beauti
fully whatever the setting.
My friend Jim Brehm is one of the most elegant designers
in New York. He had a beautiful studio apartment downtown
where he used to host a party every other Thursday. By the
way, Thursdays are wonderful days for dinner parties. It doesn't
cut into people's weekend plans and yet folks are willing to go
a little late knowing that they have only one day left in the work
week.
I marveled at Jim's ability to make simplicity so elegant. I
found the same quality in Jim's architecture and designs. His stu
dio had a long bench covered in velvet along one wall and a few
black leather cubes to sit on. We'd be served champagne. Light jazz
music would play in the background. The dinner guests tended to
be a fascinating mix of artists and writers and musicians.
To eat, we'd walk five steps to a small simple wooden table with
no tablecloth, adorned with two silver candles. The chairs were
fold-out. Each plate had a big bowl of homemade chili on it and a
torn-off piece of fresh bread. For dessert, he would serve ice cream
and more champagne. It was simply perfect, and perfectly simple.
Anyone can throw a dinner party. Let me give you an
example—my former business manager, Mark Ramsay. I first met
Mark when he was an accountant for another business manager
who specialized in entertainment clients. He was an unhappy
camper back then, and he wanted to break out on his own. After
mustering enough courage, at the age of twenty-five, he opened
his own operation. I became his first client.
Mark became a regular at my dinner parties in New York. As
a client and a friend, Mark would return the favor by inviting
me out to dinner or to see a show. After a few years, however,
I asked Mark, "So what's up with not having me over to your
home for dinner?" A meal at someone's home, after all, is what I
enjoy most.
His answer was all too common, especially among the younger
people I mentor. He told me, "I could never do a dinner party like
yours. I don't have that kind of money and I live in a run-down
studio. I don't even have a dining table."
"Dining table! Who needs a dining table?" I said.
With that, I convinced Mark to give it a try. I told him I'd be his
anchor guest and suggested that he invite four others for dinner. I
told him to get some simple wine, but plenty of it. For appetizers,
set out chips and salsa, or dip with vegetables. Buy a foldable
round tabletop that one can easily find and place it on the coffee
table. Voila!—you've got yourself a grand dining table.
For food, I told him, forget about cooking. Get some salads
and a roasted chicken from the deli. For dessert, buy some cookies
and ice cream, and keep the wine flowing.
The party was a huge success. Mark invited a potential client,
me, and a friend I brought along. All four of us are now his
clients.
You see, there's only one real rule to these get-togethers: Have
fun. All right, there are a few other rules that might help you along
the way. Among them:
1. Create a theme.
There is no reason that a small dinner party should not have a
theme. One simple idea can help you pull the food and atmos
phere together. You can build a party around anything, really. It
could be your mother's meatloaf recipe, a holiday, black tie (used
rarely, as we want people to be totally comfortable), vegan food,
specific music—whatever you like. People will get jazzed when
they know you're being creative.
I remember one example of a theme being put to good use that
comes from an article I read years ago in the Washington Post,
about a woman named Perdita Huston. When President Carter
appointed Huston regional director of the Peace Corps for North
Africa, the Near East, Asia, and the Pacific in 1978, she started her
weekly For Women Only dinner parties.
The dinner parties filled a void for Huston, who explained how
she came up with the idea. "Because of the size of the region I
administered for the Peace Corps, I was obliged to do much trav
eling.
"When I wasn't out of town on Peace Corps business, I
thought it important to be at home with my son, Pierre, who was
then seven years old. Also, because of my travels, I began losing
touch with many of my friends, but instead of trying to see people
one-on-one in restaurant situations, I devised this scheme of giv
ing weekly dinner parties.
"Right about that same time, I also came to realize there were
a lot of women in my situation: single women in high-level jobs
whose professional lives were presenting certain problems and
often overwhelming their private lives. In many ways, the women
in the Carter administration were pioneers who needed support
ive networking, so I decided to limit my guests to women only.
"What I did was simply expand my Sunday cooking to include
preparations for a Monday-night meal for twelve. I would often
make couscous or a lamb-based soup, which is used during
Ramadan in Algeria to break the fast at sundown. It's called
chorba, which means soup; in fact, it's called The Soup. It's very
spicy and good enough to be an entire meal. Often I would just
prepare a huge tureen of it along with hot bread and a big salad.
Desserts were simply fruit and cheese.
"The response to my Monday-night For Women Only dinner
was really overwhelming," she continued. "I always used my finest
china and crystal and silver candlesticks. In other words, I treated
these occasions the way most hostesses treat conventional male/
female dinner parties.
"Our dinner-table conversations are unusually candid. We
talk—or argue—about U.S. foreign policy or discuss problems
common to women in management positions, such as how to
combat stereotypes or sexism in the workplace.
"We get a lot of feedback from each other and, because of our
experience, can suggest various people to see, organizations to
contact, or strategies to develop. Because they are so supportive,
these dinners have become very important to many of us."
Huston's weekly parties became an institution in the Washing
ton, D.C., area where she lived. It brought like-minded women
together who bonded and supported one another through the
similar trials and tribulations each was going through. There's no
reason you can't do the same thing. Creating a theme around a
point of commonality—be it race, religion, gender, occupation, or
anything else—can infuse your get-togethers with added purpose,
and help you attract others.
2. Use invitations.
While I'm all for slapdash impromptu parties, the dinner parties
that will be most successful will be those you've devoted some
time and energy to. Whether by phone, e-mail, or handwritten
note, be sure to get your invites out early—at least a month in
advance—so people can have a chance to plan accordingly—and
so you'll know who is and who is not coming.
3. Don't be a kitchen slave.
There's no sense in a party being all work. If you can't hire a caterer,
either cook all the food ahead of time or just use takeout. If the food
is good and the presentation snazzy, your guests will be impressed.
These days, I usually opt for a caterer. But you can have a sim-
ilarly elegant party for much less if you're willing to get creative
and spend some time preparing. The key to low-budget dinner
parties is to keep it simple. Make one large dish, like a stew or chili
that can be prepared a day or two ahead of time. Serve it with great
bread and salad. That's all you need.
Well, maybe not ALL you need. My other expense is alcohol. I
love—love!—great wine. I always go a little overboard with the
vino. And really, could God have blessed us with a better social
lubricant? It amounts to the finest party favor ever created. But
again, everyone has their own predilections, and I'm sure you can
pull off a perfectly fabulous dinner party with just soda.
4. Create atmosphere.
Make sure to spend an hour or two gussying up your place. Noth
ing expensive or out of the ordinary, mind you. Candles, flowers,
dim lighting, and music set a good mood. Add a nice centerpiece
to the dinner table. Get a young family member to walk around
serving drinks if you don't have a bartender or waiter. The point is
to give your guests all the signals they need to understand that it's
time to enjoy.
5. Forget being formal.
Most dinner parties don't call for anything fancy. Follow the KISS
principle (Keep It Simple, Silly). Good food. Good people. Lots of
wine. Good conversation. That's a successful dinner party. I always
underdress just so no one else feels they did. Jeans and a jacket are
my standard fare, but you judge for yourself.
6. Don't seat couples together.
The essence of a good dinner party lies in seating everyone prop
erly. If you seat couples together, things can get boring. Mix and
match, putting people together who don't know each other but
perhaps share an interest of some kind. I like to set placeholders
where I want people to sit. Each placeholder is a simple card with
the guest's name on it. If I have the time, I love to put an interest
ing question or joke on the back of the card that guests can use to
break the ice with one another. Or you can go out and buy funny
greeting cards just to make things interesting.
7. Relax.
Guests take their cues from the host—if you're having fun, odds
are that they will, too. The night of the party, your job is to enjoy
all the fruits of your labor. That's an order.