CHAPTER 5
The Genius of Audacity
Seize this very minute; what you can do, or dream you can, begin
it; Boldness has genius, power and magic in it.
—JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
My father, Pete Ferrazzi, was a first-generation American, a
Merchant Marine sailor in World War II, and an unedu
cated steelworker whose world was hard hours and low wages. He
wanted more for me, his son. He and I were inseparable when I
was growing up (his friends called me "re-Pete" because he took
me everywhere with him). He knew I would have a better life if he
could help me find a way out of our working-class heritage.
But my dad didn't know the exits. He'd never been to college.
He knew nothing of country clubs or private schools. He could
picture only one man who would have the sort of pull that could
help me: his boss. Actually, the boss of his boss's boss's boss—Alex
McKenna, CEO of Kennametal, in whose factory my dad worked.
The two men had never met. But Dad had a clear sense of how
the world worked. He'd observed, even from the plant floor, that
audacity was often the only thing that separated two equally tal
ented men and their job titles. So he asked to speak with
McKenna. McKenna, upon hearing the request, was so intrigued
that he took the meeting. In the course of the meeting, he agreed
to meet me—but nothing more.
It turned out that McKenna liked me—partly because of the
way I had come to his attention. He served on the board of a local
private elementary school, the Valley School of Ligonier, where all
the wealthy families sent their children; by reputation it was one
of the best elementary schools in the country. Strings were pulled,
and Mr. McKenna got us an appointment with Peter Messer, the
headmaster.
The day I enrolled in the Valley School, on scholarship, I entered
a new world that set me on an entirely new course, just as my father
had hoped. Over the next ten years, I got one of the best educations
in America, starting with Valley School, then Kiski School, Yale
University, and on to Harvard Business School. And it would never
have happened if my father hadn't believed that it never hurts to ask.
As I look back on my career, it was the single most important
act in my life. Moreover, the lesson I learned from my father's
action, like no other, informed all that I have done since.
My father simply couldn't be embarrassed when it came to ful
filling his family's needs. I remember once we were driving down
the road to our home when Dad spotted a broken Big Wheel tri
cycle in someone's trash. He stopped the car, picked it up, and
knocked on the door of the home where the discarded toy lay
waiting to be picked up.
"I spotted this Big Wheel in your trash," he told the owner. "Do
you mind if I take it? I think I can fix it. It would make me feel
wonderful to give my son something like this."
What guts! Can you imagine such a proud, working-class guy
approaching that woman and, essentially, admitting he's so poor
that he'd like to have her garbage?
Oh, but that's not the half of it. Imagine how that woman felt,
having been given an opportunity to give such a gift to another
person. It surely made her day.
"Of course," she gushed, explaining that her children were
grown and that years had passed since the toy had been used.
"You're welcome to the bicycle I have, too. It's nice enough that I
just couldn't throw it away..."
So we drove on. I had a "new" Big Wheel to ride and a bike to
grow into. She had a smile and a fluttering heart that only benev
olence breeds. And Dad had taught me that there is genius, even
kindness, in being bold.
Every time I start to set limits to what I can and can't do, or fear
starts to creep into my thinking, I remember that Big Wheel tri
cycle. I remind myself how people with a low tolerance for risk,
whose behavior is guided by fear, have a low propensity for success.
The memories of those days have stuck with me. My father
taught me that the worst anyone can say is no. If they choose not
to give their time or their help, it's their loss.
Nothing in my life has created opportunity like a willingness
to ask, whatever the situation. When I was just an anonymous
attendee at the Davos Economic Forum in Switzerland, I walked
onto a hotel bus and saw Nike founder Phil Knight. Knight was
like a rock star to me, given his extraordinary success at creating
and building Nike, and the many marketing innovations he intro
duced over the years. Was I nervous? You bet. But I jumped at the
opportunity to speak with him, and made a beeline for the seat
next to his. Later, he would become YaYa's first blue-chip cus
tomer. I do this sort of thing all the time, whatever the situation.
Sometimes I fail. I've got an equally long list of people I've
attempted to befriend who weren't interested in my overtures.
Audacity in networking has the same pitfalls and fears associated
with dating—which I'm not nearly as good at as I am the business
variety of meeting people.
Sticking to the people we already know is a tempting behavior.
But unlike some forms of dating, a networker isn't looking to
achieve only a single successful union. Creating an enriching cir
cle of trusted relationships requires one to be out there, in the mix,
all the time. To this day, every time I make a call or introduce
myself to people I don't know, the fear that they might reject me is
there. Then I remember the Big Wheel my father got me, and push
ahead anyway.
Most of us don't find networking the least bit instinctive or
natural. Of course, there are individuals whose inherent self-
confidence and social skills enable them to connect with ease.
Then there are the rest of us.
In the early days at YaYa, I was worried for the company's sur
vival. For the first time in my career, I had to reach out to a lot of
people I didn't know, representing an unknown company, push
ing a product that was untested in the marketplace. It was uncom
fortable. I didn't want to cold-call executives from BMW and
MasterCard and pitch them my wares. But you know what? Push
ing to get into BMW was not that difficult when the alternative
was laying off a bunch of my staff or failing in the eyes of my
board and investors.
Mustering the audacity to talk with people who don't know me
often simply comes down to balancing the fear I have of embar
rassment against the fear of failure and its repercussions. For my
father, either he asked or his family didn't have. For me, I either
ask or I'm not successful. That fear always overrides my anxiety
about rejection or being embarrassed.
Ultimately, everyone has to ask himself or herself how they're
going to fail. We all do, you know, so let's get that out of the way.
The choice isn't between success and failure; it's between choosing
risk and striving for greatness, or risking nothing and being cer
tain of mediocrity.
For many people, the fear of meeting others is closely tied to
the fear of public speaking (a fear that consistently beats out death
as the one thing we dread most). Some of the world's most famous
speakers admit to feeling similar anxiety. As Mark Twain said,
"There are two types of speakers: those that are nervous and those
that are liars."
The best way to deal with this anxiety is to first acknowledge
that our fear is perfectly normal. You are not alone. The second
thing is to recognize that getting over that fear is critical to your
success. The third is to commit to getting better.
Here are a few things you can do today to make good on that
commitment and get more comfortable at being audacious in
social situations:
• Find a role model.
We're predisposed to seek out people like us—shy people tend to
congregate with other shy people, and outgoing people congre
gate with outgoing people—because they unconsciously affirm
our own behaviors. But everyone knows that one person within
their group of friends and associates who seems to engage others
with little or no fear. If you're not yet ready to take the big leap of
addressing new people on your own, let these people help you and
show you the way. Take them with you, when appropriate, to
social outings and observe their behaviors. Pay attention to their
actions. Over time, you'll adopt some of their techniques. Slowly,
you'll build up the courage to reach out by yourself.
• Learn to speak.
Many businesses have responded to the nearly infinite number
of people who recognize they need to become better speakers.
These educational organizations realize you're not looking to give
speeches to an audience of a thousand people (at least initially).
Most people who come to them for help are looking to gain
self-confidence and some trusty tools for overcoming shyness.
They don't offer one or two simple quick-fix cure-alls. What they
do offer is a chance to practice, in a nonintimidating environ
ment, with an instructor who can guide and push you. There are
hundreds of coaches and schools devoted to this type of training.
One of the most well known is the Toastmasters Club. They're
sure to have a local chapter in your area. It is a well-run organiza
tion that has helped millions of people hone their speaking skills
and overcome their fears.
• Get involved.
You'll feel most comfortable when you're doing something you
enjoy with others who share your enthusiasm. Any hobby is an
opportunity to get involved: stamp collecting, singing, sports,
literature. Clubs develop around all of these interests. Join up.
Become an active member. When you feel up to it, become one of
the leaders of the group. This last step is crucial. Being a leader in
life takes practice—so practice! The possibilities for making new
contacts and reaching out to others will grow and grow.
• Get therapy.
I know, I know, you're probably thinking, "He wants me to go to
therapy to become better at talking to people?" Let me explain.
One, I think merely acting on the desire to be better than you are
now, no matter the venue, is a very important commitment. Two,
some of the most successful people I know have been to a thera
pist at one point in their lives or another. I'm not suggesting ther
apy will make you a better people person, but it might help you
address your own fears and social anxieties in a more productive
way. Many studies funded by the National Institute of Mental
Health report a high success rate using counseling to alleviate the
conditions that normally inhibit a shy person.
• Just do it.
Set a goal for yourself of initiating a meeting with one new person
a week. It doesn't matter where or with whom. Introduce yourself
to someone on the bus. Slide up next to someone at the bar and
say hello. Hang out at the company water cooler and force your
self to talk to a fellow employee you've never spoken with. You'll
find that it gets easier and easier with practice. Best of all, you'll get
comfortable with the idea of rejection. With that perspective, even
failure becomes a step forward. Embrace it as learning. As the
playwright Samuel Beckett wrote, "Fail, fail again. Fail better."
Fear debilitates. Once you realize there's no benefit to holding
back, every situation and every person—no matter how seemingly
beyond your reach—becomes an opportunity to succeed.
The Madam of Moxie
When it comes to improving your speaking skills, no one is better
than DeAnne Rosenberg, a thirty-two-year career counselor and
owner of her own management consulting firm, DeAnne Rosenberg
Inc. Rosenberg is the madam of moxie, and for good reason.
In 1969, she read a Wall Street Journal article that noted
the absence of a female voice in the American Management
Association.
"They were interviewing the then president of the A.M.A., who
was quoted as saying, 'We haven't found a woman who can speak
authoritatively in public about management,'" Rosenberg recalls.
She cut the article out and sent a letter to the A.M.A. telling them to
look no further. Two weeks went by and her letter went unanswered.
"Well, that wouldn't do," she snaps. "I wrote another letter straight
to the president, effectively telling them to put up or shut up."
Two days later, the president of the association called to say that
they had scheduled her for a lecture. DeAnne went on to become
the first woman to speak on behalf of the A.M.A.
The lesson from that fateful series of events remains with her: The
recipe for achievement is a medley of self-assuredness, dogged per
sistence, and audacity. Encounters of the audacious kind, as
DeAnne learned, are what successful careers are built upon. In her
many years teaching others to overcome their fears, she's created
a time-tested script that anyone can use when meeting someone for
the first time.
I found the script helpful. I think it can help a lot of you as well,
and I gratefully offer it to you here:
1. State the situation. "You go right in and hit them with how you
see it in the cold light of day, without being too inflammatory
or dramatic," says Rosenberg. She made it clear to the A.M.A.
that a) having no women speakers was wrong, and b) hiring her
would be a step in the right direction. It makes sense that before
you can speak persuasively—that is, before you speak from a
position of passion and personal knowledge—you need to know
where you stand.
2. Communicate your feelings. We downplay the influence of emo
tions in our day-to-day contacts, especially in the business world.
We're told that vulnerability is a bad thing and we should be
wary of revealing our feelings. But as we gain comfort using "I
feel" with others, our encounters take on depth and sincerity.
Your emotions are a gift of respect and caring to your listeners.
3. Deliver the bottom line. This is the moment of truth when you
state, with utter clarity, what it is you want. If you're going to put
your neck on the line, you'd better know why. The truth is the
fastest route to a solution, but be realistic. While I knew Phil
Knight of Nike wasn't going to buy anything based on one five-
minute conversation on a bus at Davos, I did make sure to get his
e-mail and tell him that I'd like to follow up with him again some
time. Then I did so.
4. Use an open-ended question. A request that is expressed as a ques
tion—one that cannot be answered by a yes or no—is less threat
ening. How do you feel about this? How can we solve this
problem? Can we meet up again sometime soon? The issue has
been raised, your feelings expressed, your desires articulated. With
an open-ended suggestion or question, you invite the other person
to work toward a solution with you. I didn't insist on a specific lunch
date at a specific time with Phil. I left it open and didn't allow our
first exchange to be weighted down by unnecessary obligations.