INTRODUCTION
The North and South of Temperament
Montgomery, Alabama. December 1, 1955. Early evening. A public
bus pulls to a stop and a sensibly dressed woman in her forties gets
on. She carries herself erectly, despite having spent the day bent
over an ironing board in a dingy basement tailor shop at the
Montgomery Fair department store. Her feet are swollen, her
shoulders ache. She sits in the first row of the Colored section and
watches quietly as the bus fills with riders. Until the driver orders
her to give her seat to a white passenger.
The woman utters a single word that ignites one of the most
important civil rights protests of the twentieth century, one word
that helps America find its better self.
The word is “No.”
The driver threatens to have her arrested.
“You may do that,” says Rosa Parks.
A police officer arrives. He asks Parks why she won’t move.
“Why do you all push us around?” she answers simply.
“I don’t know,” he says. “But the law is the law, and you’re under
arrest.”
On the afternoon of her trial and conviction for disorderly
conduct, the Montgomery Improvement Association holds a rally for
Parks at the Holt Street Baptist Church, in the poorest section of
town. Five thousand gather to support Parks’s lonely act of courage.
They squeeze inside the church until its pews can hold no more. The
rest wait patiently outside, listening through loudspeakers. The
Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. addresses the crowd. “There comes
a time that people get tired of being trampled over by the iron feet
of oppression,” he tells them. “There comes a time when people get
tired of being pushed out of the glittering sunlight of life’s July and
left standing amidst the piercing chill of an Alpine November.”
He praises Parks’s bravery and hugs her. She stands silently, her
mere presence enough to galvanize the crowd. The association
launches a city-wide bus boycott that lasts 381 days. The people
trudge miles to work. They carpool with strangers. They change the
course of American history.
I had always imagined Rosa Parks as a stately woman with a bold
temperament, someone who could easily stand up to a busload of
glowering passengers. But when she died in 2005 at the age of
ninety-two, the flood of obituaries recalled her as soft-spoken,
sweet, and small in stature. They said she was “timid and shy” but
had “the courage of a lion.” They were full of phrases like “radical
humility” and “quiet fortitude.” What does it mean to be quiet and
have fortitude? these descriptions asked implicitly. How could you
be shy and courageous?
Parks herself seemed aware of this paradox, calling her
autobiography Quiet Strength—a title that challenges us to question
our assumptions. Why shouldn’t quiet be strong? And what else can
quiet do that we don’t give it credit for?
Our lives are shaped as profoundly by personality as by gender or
race. And the single most important aspect of personality—the
“north and south of temperament,” as one scientist puts it—is where
we fall on the introvert-extrovert spectrum. Our place on this
continuum influences our choice of friends and mates, and how we
make conversation, resolve differences, and show love. It affects the
careers we choose and whether or not we succeed at them. It
governs how likely we are to exercise, commit adultery, function
well without sleep, learn from our mistakes, place big bets in the
stock market, delay gratification, be a good leader, and ask “what
if.”* It’s reflected in our brain pathways, neurotransmitters, and
remote corners of our nervous systems. Today introversion and
extroversion are two of the most exhaustively researched subjects in
personality psychology, arousing the curiosity of hundreds of
scientists.
These researchers have made exciting discoveries aided by the
latest technology, but they’re part of a long and storied tradition.
Poets and philosophers have been thinking about introverts and
extroverts since the dawn of recorded time. Both personality types
appear in the Bible and in the writings of Greek and Roman
physicians, and some evolutionary psychologists say that the history
of these types reaches back even farther than that: the animal
kingdom also boasts “introverts” and “extroverts,” as we’ll see,
from fruit flies to pumpkinseed fish to rhesus monkeys. As with
other complementary pairings—masculinity and femininity, East
and West, liberal and conservative—humanity would be
unrecognizable, and vastly diminished, without both personality
styles.
Take the partnership of Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King Jr.: a
formidable orator refusing to give up his seat on a segregated bus
wouldn’t have had the same effect as a modest woman who’d
clearly prefer to keep silent but for the exigencies of the situation.
And Parks didn’t have the stuff to thrill a crowd if she’d tried to
stand up and announce that she had a dream. But with King’s help,
she didn’t have to.
Yet today we make room for a remarkably narrow range of
personality styles. We’re told that to be great is to be bold, to be
happy is to be sociable. We see ourselves as a nation of extroverts—
which means that we’ve lost sight of who we really are. Depending
on which study you consult, one third to one half of Americans are
introverts—in other words, one out of every two or three people you
know. (Given that the United States is among the most extroverted
of nations, the number must be at least as high in other parts of the
world.) If you’re not an introvert yourself, you are surely raising,
managing, married to, or coupled with one.
If these statistics surprise you, that’s probably because so many
people pretend to be extroverts. Closet introverts pass undetected
on playgrounds, in high school locker rooms, and in the corridors of
corporate America. Some fool even themselves, until some life
event—a layoff, an empty nest, an inheritance that frees them to
spend time as they like—jolts them into taking stock of their true
natures. You have only to raise the subject of this book with your
friends and acquaintances to find that the most unlikely people
consider themselves introverts.
It makes sense that so many introverts hide even from
themselves. We live with a value system that I call the Extrovert
Ideal—the omnipresent belief that the ideal self is gregarious,
alpha, and comfortable in the spotlight. The archetypal extrovert
prefers action to contemplation, risk-taking to heed-taking,
certainty to doubt. He favors quick decisions, even at the risk of
being wrong. She works well in teams and socializes in groups. We
like to think that we value individuality, but all too often we
admire one type of individual—the kind who’s comfortable “putting
himself out there.” Sure, we allow technologically gifted loners who
launch companies in garages to have any personality they please,
but they are the exceptions, not the rule, and our tolerance extends
mainly to those who get fabulously wealthy or hold the promise of
doing so.
Introversion—along with its cousins sensitivity, seriousness, and
shyness—is now a second-class personality trait, somewhere
between a disappointment and a pathology. Introverts living under
the Extrovert Ideal are like women in a man’s world, discounted
because of a trait that goes to the core of who they are.
Extroversion is an enormously appealing personality style, but
we’ve turned it into an oppressive standard to which most of us feel
we must conform.
The Extrovert Ideal has been documented in many studies, though
this research has never been grouped under a single name. Talkative
people, for example, are rated as smarter, better-looking, more
interesting, and more desirable as friends. Velocity of speech counts
as well as volume: we rank fast talkers as more competent and
likable than slow ones. The same dynamics apply in groups, where
research shows that the voluble are considered smarter than the
reticent—even though there’s zero correlation between the gift of
gab and good ideas. Even the word introvert is stigmatized—one
informal study, by psychologist Laurie Helgoe, found that introverts
described their own physical appearance in vivid language (“green-
blue eyes,” “exotic,” “high cheekbones”), but when asked to
describe generic introverts they drew a bland and distasteful picture
(“ungainly,” “neutral colors,” “skin problems”).
But we make a grave mistake to embrace the Extrovert Ideal so
unthinkingly. Some of our greatest ideas, art, and inventions—from
the theory of evolution to van Gogh’s sunflowers to the personal
computer—came from quiet and cerebral people who knew how to
tune in to their inner worlds and the treasures to be found there.
Without introverts, the world would be devoid of:
the theory of gravity
the theory of relativity
W. B. Yeats’s “The Second Coming”
Chopin’s nocturnes
Proust’s In Search of Lost Time
Peter Pan
Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four and Animal Farm
The Cat in the Hat
Charlie Brown
Schindler’s List, E.T., and Close Encounters of the Third Kind
Google
Harry Potter*
As the science journalist Winifred Gallagher writes: “The glory of
the disposition that stops to consider stimuli rather than rushing to
engage with them is its long association with intellectual and
artistic achievement. Neither E=mc2 nor Paradise Lost was dashed
off by a party animal.” Even in less obviously introverted
occupations, like finance, politics, and activism, some of the
greatest leaps forward were made by introverts. In this book we’ll
see how figures like Eleanor Roosevelt, Al Gore, Warren Buffett,
Gandhi—and Rosa Parks—achieved what they did not in spite of but
because of their introversion.
Yet, as Quiet will explore, many of the most important institutions
of contemporary life are designed for those who enjoy group
projects and high levels of stimulation. As children, our classroom
desks are increasingly arranged in pods, the better to foster group
learning, and research suggests that the vast majority of teachers
believe that the ideal student is an extrovert. We watch TV shows
whose protagonists are not the “children next door,” like the Cindy
Bradys and Beaver Cleavers of yesteryear, but rock stars and
webcast hostesses with outsized personalities, like Hannah Montana
and Carly Shay of iCarly. Even Sid the Science Kid, a PBS-sponsored
role model for the preschool set, kicks off each school day by
performing dance moves with his pals. (“Check out my moves! I’m
a rock star!”)
As adults, many of us work for organizations that insist we work
in teams, in offices without walls, for supervisors who value “people
skills” above all. To advance our careers, we’re expected to promote
ourselves unabashedly. The scientists whose research gets funded
often have confident, perhaps overconfident, personalities. The
artists whose work adorns the walls of contemporary museums
strike impressive poses at gallery openings. The authors whose
books get published—once accepted as a reclusive breed—are now
vetted by publicists to make sure they’re talk-show ready. (You
wouldn’t be reading this book if I hadn’t convinced my publisher
that I was enough of a pseudo-extrovert to promote it.)
If you’re an introvert, you also know that the bias against quiet
can cause deep psychic pain. As a child you might have overheard
your parents apologize for your shyness. (“Why can’t you be more
like the Kennedy boys?” the Camelot-besotted parents of one man I
interviewed repeatedly asked him.) Or at school you might have
been prodded to come “out of your shell”—that noxious expression
which fails to appreciate that some animals naturally carry shelter
everywhere they go, and that some humans are just the same. “All
the comments from childhood still ring in my ears, that I was lazy,
stupid, slow, boring,” writes a member of an e-mail list called
Introvert Retreat. “By the time I was old enough to figure out that I
was simply introverted, it was a part of my being, the assumption
that there is something inherently wrong with me. I wish I could
find that little vestige of doubt and remove it.”
Now that you’re an adult, you might still feel a pang of guilt
when you decline a dinner invitation in favor of a good book. Or
maybe you like to eat alone in restaurants and could do without the
pitying looks from fellow diners. Or you’re told that you’re “in your
head too much,” a phrase that’s often deployed against the quiet
and cerebral.
Of course, there’s another word for such people: thinkers.
I have seen firsthand how difficult it is for introverts to take stock
of their own talents, and how powerful it is when finally they do.
For more than ten years I trained people of all stripes—corporate
lawyers and college students, hedge-fund managers and married
couples—in negotiation skills. Of course, we covered the basics:
how to prepare for a negotiation, when to make the first offer, and
what to do when the other person says “take it or leave it.” But I
also helped clients figure out their natural personalities and how to
make the most of them.
My very first client was a young woman named Laura. She was a
Wall Street lawyer, but a quiet and daydreamy one who dreaded the
spotlight and disliked aggression. She had managed somehow to
make it through the crucible of Harvard Law School—a place where
classes are conducted in huge, gladiatorial amphitheaters, and
where she once got so nervous that she threw up on the way to
class. Now that she was in the real world, she wasn’t sure she could
represent her clients as forcefully as they expected.
For the first three years on the job, Laura was so junior that she
never had to test this premise. But one day the senior lawyer she’d
been working with went on vacation, leaving her in charge of an
important negotiation. The client was a South American
manufacturing company that was about to default on a bank loan
and hoped to renegotiate its terms; a syndicate of bankers that
owned the endangered loan sat on the other side of the negotiating
table.
Laura would have preferred to hide under said table, but she was
accustomed to fighting such impulses. Gamely but nervously, she
took her spot in the lead chair, flanked by her clients: general
counsel on one side and senior financial officer on the other. These
happened to be Laura’s favorite clients: gracious and soft-spoken,
very different from the master-of-the-universe types her firm
usually represented. In the past, Laura had taken the general
counsel to a Yankees game and the financial officer shopping for a
handbag for her sister. But now these cozy outings—just the kind of
socializing Laura enjoyed—seemed a world away. Across the table
sat nine disgruntled investment bankers in tailored suits and
expensive shoes, accompanied by their lawyer, a square-jawed
woman with a hearty manner. Clearly not the self-doubting type,
this woman launched into an impressive speech on how Laura’s
clients would be lucky simply to accept the bankers’ terms. It was,
she said, a very magnanimous offer.
Everyone waited for Laura to reply, but she couldn’t think of
anything to say. So she just sat there. Blinking. All eyes on her. Her
clients shifting uneasily in their seats. Her thoughts running in a
familiar loop: I’m too quiet for this kind of thing, too unassuming, too
cerebral. She imagined the person who would be better equipped to
save the day: someone bold, smooth, ready to pound the table. In
middle school this person, unlike Laura, would have been called
“outgoing,” the highest accolade her seventh-grade classmates
knew, higher even than “pretty,” for a girl, or “athletic,” for a guy.
Laura promised herself that she only had to make it through the
day. Tomorrow she would go look for another career.
Then she remembered what I’d told her again and again: she was
an introvert, and as such she had unique powers in negotiation—
perhaps less obvious but no less formidable. She’d probably
prepared more than everyone else. She had a quiet but firm
speaking style. She rarely spoke without thinking. Being mild-
mannered, she could take strong, even aggressive, positions while
coming across as perfectly reasonable. And she tended to ask
questions—lots of them—and actually listen to the answers, which,
no matter what your personality, is crucial to strong negotiation.
So Laura finally started doing what came naturally.
“Let’s go back a step. What are your numbers based on?” she
asked.
“What if we structured the loan this way, do you think it might
work?”
“That way?”
“Some other way?”
At first her questions were tentative. She picked up steam as she
went along, posing them more forcefully and making it clear that
she’d done her homework and wouldn’t concede the facts. But she
also stayed true to her own style, never raising her voice or losing
her decorum. Every time the bankers made an assertion that seemed
unbudgeable, Laura tried to be constructive. “Are you saying that’s
the only way to go? What if we took a different approach?”
Eventually her simple queries shifted the mood in the room, just
as the negotiation textbooks say they will. The bankers stopped
speechifying and dominance-posing, activities for which Laura felt
hopelessly ill-equipped, and they started having an actual
conversation.
More discussion. Still no agreement. One of the bankers revved
up again, throwing his papers down and storming out of the room.
Laura ignored this display, mostly because she didn’t know what
else to do. Later on someone told her that at that pivotal moment
she’d played a good game of something called “negotiation jujitsu”;
but she knew that she was just doing what you learn to do naturally
as a quiet person in a loudmouth world.
Finally the two sides struck a deal. The bankers left the building,
Laura’s favorite clients headed for the airport, and Laura went
home, curled up with a book, and tried to forget the day’s tensions.
But the next morning, the lead lawyer for the bankers—the
vigorous woman with the strong jaw—called to offer her a job.
“I’ve never seen anyone so nice and so tough at the same time,” she
said. And the day after that, the lead banker called Laura, asking if
her law firm would represent his company in the future. “We need
someone who can help us put deals together without letting ego get
in the way,” he said.
By sticking to her own gentle way of doing things, Laura had
reeled in new business for her firm and a job offer for herself.
Raising her voice and pounding the table was unnecessary.
Today Laura understands that her introversion is an essential part
of who she is, and she embraces her reflective nature. The loop
inside her head that accused her of being too quiet and unassuming
plays much less often. Laura knows that she can hold her own when
she needs to.
What exactly do I mean when I say that Laura is an introvert? When
I started writing this book, the first thing I wanted to find out was
precisely how researchers define introversion and extroversion. I
knew that in 1921 the influential psychologist Carl Jung had
published a bombshell of a book, Psychological Types, popularizing
the terms introvert and extrovert as the central building blocks of
personality. Introverts are drawn to the inner world of thought and
feeling, said Jung, extroverts to the external life of people and
activities. Introverts focus on the meaning they make of the events
swirling around them; extroverts plunge into the events themselves.
Introverts recharge their batteries by being alone; extroverts need
to recharge when they don’t socialize enough. If you’ve ever taken a
Myers-Briggs personality test, which is based on Jung’s thinking and
used by the majority of universities and Fortune 100 companies,
then you may already be familiar with these ideas.
But what do contemporary researchers have to say? I soon
discovered that there is no all-purpose definition of introversion or
extroversion; these are not unitary categories, like “curly-haired” or
“sixteen-year-old,” in which everyone can agree on who qualifies
for inclusion. For example, adherents of the Big Five school of
personality psychology (which argues that human personality can
be boiled down to five primary traits) define introversion not in
terms of a rich inner life but as a lack of qualities such as
assertiveness and sociability. There are almost as many definitions
of introvert and extrovert as there are personality psychologists, who
spend a great deal of time arguing over which meaning is most
accurate. Some think that Jung’s ideas are outdated; others swear
that he’s the only one who got it right.
Still, today’s psychologists tend to agree on several important
points: for example, that introverts and extroverts differ in the level
of outside stimulation that they need to function well. Introverts
feel “just right” with less stimulation, as when they sip wine with a
close friend, solve a crossword puzzle, or read a book. Extroverts
enjoy the extra bang that comes from activities like meeting new
people, skiing slippery slopes, and cranking up the stereo. “Other
people are very arousing,” says the personality psychologist David
Winter, explaining why your typical introvert would rather spend
her vacation reading on the beach than partying on a cruise ship.
“They arouse threat, fear, flight, and love. A hundred people are
very stimulating compared to a hundred books or a hundred grains
of sand.”
Many psychologists would also agree that introverts and
extroverts work differently. Extroverts tend to tackle assignments
quickly. They make fast (sometimes rash) decisions, and are
comfortable multitasking and risk-taking. They enjoy “the thrill of
the chase” for rewards like money and status.
Introverts often work more slowly and deliberately. They like to
focus on one task at a time and can have mighty powers of
concentration. They’re relatively immune to the lures of wealth and
fame.
Our personalities also shape our social styles. Extroverts are the
people who will add life to your dinner party and laugh generously
at your jokes. They tend to be assertive, dominant, and in great
need of company. Extroverts think out loud and on their feet; they
prefer talking to listening, rarely find themselves at a loss for
words, and occasionally blurt out things they never meant to say.
They’re comfortable with conflict, but not with solitude.
Introverts, in contrast, may have strong social skills and enjoy
parties and business meetings, but after a while wish they were
home in their pajamas. They prefer to devote their social energies
to close friends, colleagues, and family. They listen more than they
talk, think before they speak, and often feel as if they express
themselves better in writing than in conversation. They tend to
dislike conflict. Many have a horror of small talk, but enjoy deep
discussions.
A few things introverts are not: The word introvert is not a
synonym for hermit or misanthrope. Introverts can be these things,
but most are perfectly friendly. One of the most humane phrases in
the English language—“Only connect!”—was written by the
distinctly introverted E. M. Forster in a novel exploring the question
of how to achieve “human love at its height.”
Nor are introverts necessarily shy. Shyness is the fear of social
disapproval or humiliation, while introversion is a preference for
environments that are not overstimulating. Shyness is inherently
painful; introversion is not. One reason that people confuse the two
concepts is that they sometimes overlap (though psychologists
debate to what degree). Some psychologists map the two tendencies
on vertical and horizontal axes, with the introvert-extrovert
spectrum on the horizontal axis, and the anxious-stable spectrum on
the vertical. With this model, you end up with four quadrants of
personality types: calm extroverts, anxious (or impulsive)
extroverts, calm introverts, and anxious introverts. In other words,
you can be a shy extrovert, like Barbra Streisand, who has a larger-
than-life personality and paralyzing stage fright; or a non-shy
introvert, like Bill Gates, who by all accounts keeps to himself but is
unfazed by the opinions of others.
You can also, of course, be both shy and an introvert: T. S. Eliot
was a famously private soul who wrote in “The Waste Land” that he
could “show you fear in a handful of dust.” Many shy people turn
inward, partly as a refuge from the socializing that causes them
such anxiety. And many introverts are shy, partly as a result of
receiving the message that there’s something wrong with their
preference for reflection, and partly because their physiologies, as
we’ll see, compel them to withdraw from high-stimulation
environments.
But for all their differences, shyness and introversion have in
common something profound. The mental state of a shy extrovert
sitting quietly in a business meeting may be very different from that
of a calm introvert—the shy person is afraid to speak up, while the
introvert is simply overstimulated—but to the outside world, the
two appear to be the same. This can give both types insight into
how our reverence for alpha status blinds us to things that are good
and smart and wise. For very different reasons, shy and introverted
people might choose to spend their days in behind-the-scenes
pursuits like inventing, or researching, or holding the hands of the
gravely ill—or in leadership positions they execute with quiet
competence. These are not alpha roles, but the people who play
them are role models all the same.
If you’re still not sure where you fall on the introvert-extrovert
spectrum, you can assess yourself here. Answer each question “true”
or “false,” choosing the answer that applies to you more often than
not.*
1. _______ I prefer one-on-one conversations to group activities.
2. _______ I often prefer to express myself in writing.
3. _______ I enjoy solitude.
4. _______ I seem to care less than my peers about wealth, fame, and status.
5. _______ I dislike small talk, but I enjoy talking in depth about topics that matter
to me.
6. _______ People tell me that I’m a good listener.
7. _______ I’m not a big risk-taker.
8. _______ I enjoy work that allows me to “dive in” with few interruptions.
9. _______ I like to celebrate birthdays on a small scale, with only one or two close
friends or family members.
10. _______ People describe me as “soft-spoken” or “mellow.”
11. _______ I prefer not to show or discuss my work with others until it’s finished.
12. _______ I dislike conflict.
13. _______ I do my best work on my own.
14. _______ I tend to think before I speak.
15. _______ I feel drained after being out and about, even if I’ve enjoyed myself.
16. _______ I often let calls go through to voice mail.
17. _______ If I had to choose, I’d prefer a weekend with absolutely nothing to do to
one with too many things scheduled.
18. _______ I don’t enjoy multitasking.
19. _______ I can concentrate easily.
20. _______ In classroom situations, I prefer lectures to seminars.
The more often you answered “true,” the more introverted you
probably are. If you found yourself with a roughly equal number of
“true” and “false” answers, then you may be an ambivert—yes,
there really is such a word.
But even if you answered every single question as an introvert or
extrovert, that doesn’t mean that your behavior is predictable across
all circumstances. We can’t say that every introvert is a bookworm
or every extrovert wears lampshades at parties any more than we
can say that every woman is a natural consensus-builder and every
man loves contact sports. As Jung felicitously put it, “There is no
such thing as a pure extrovert or a pure introvert. Such a man
would be in the lunatic asylum.”
This is partly because we are all gloriously complex individuals,
but also because there are so many different kinds of introverts and
extroverts. Introversion and extroversion interact with our other
personality traits and personal histories, producing wildly different
kinds of people. So if you’re an artistic American guy whose father
wished you’d try out for the football team like your rough-and-
tumble brothers, you’ll be a very different kind of introvert from,
say, a Finnish businesswoman whose parents were lighthouse
keepers. (Finland is a famously introverted nation. Finnish joke:
How can you tell if a Finn likes you? He’s staring at your shoes
instead of his own.)
Many introverts are also “highly sensitive,” which sounds poetic,
but is actually a technical term in psychology. If you are a sensitive
sort, then you’re more apt than the average person to feel
pleasantly overwhelmed by Beethoven’s “Moonlight Sonata” or a
well-turned phrase or an act of extraordinary kindness. You may be
quicker than others to feel sickened by violence and ugliness, and
you likely have a very strong conscience. When you were a child
you were probably called “shy,” and to this day feel nervous when
you’re being evaluated, for example when giving a speech or on a
first date. Later we’ll examine why this seemingly unrelated
collection of attributes tends to belong to the same person and why
this person is often introverted. (No one knows exactly how many
introverts are highly sensitive, but we know that 70 percent of
sensitives are introverts, and the other 30 percent tend to report
needing a lot of “down time.”)
All of this complexity means that not everything you read in Quiet
will apply to you, even if you consider yourself a true-blue
introvert. For one thing, we’ll spend some time talking about
shyness and sensitivity, while you might have neither of these
traits. That’s OK. Take what applies to you, and use the rest to
improve your relationships with others.
Having said all this, in Quiet we’ll try not to get too hung up on
definitions. Strictly defining terms is vital for researchers whose
studies depend on pinpointing exactly where introversion stops and
other traits, like shyness, start. But in Quiet we’ll concern ourselves
more with the fruit of that research. Today’s psychologists, joined
by neuroscientists with their brain-scanning machines, have
unearthed illuminating insights that are changing the way we see
the world—and ourselves. They are answering questions such as:
Why are some people talkative while others measure their words?
Why do some people burrow into their work and others organize
office birthday parties? Why are some people comfortable wielding
authority while others prefer neither to lead nor to be led? Can
introverts be leaders? Is our cultural preference for extroversion in
the natural order of things, or is it socially determined? From an
evolutionary perspective, introversion must have survived as a
personality trait for a reason—so what might the reason be? If
you’re an introvert, should you devote your energies to activities
that come naturally, or should you stretch yourself, as Laura did
that day at the negotiation table?
The answers might surprise you.
If there is only one insight you take away from this book, though,
I hope it’s a newfound sense of entitlement to be yourself. I can
vouch personally for the life-transforming effects of this outlook.
Remember that first client I told you about, the one I called Laura
in order to protect her identity?
That was a story about me. I was my own first client.
* Answer key: exercise: extroverts; commit adultery: extroverts; function well without sleep:
introverts; learn from our mistakes: introverts; place big bets: extroverts; delay gratification:
introverts; be a good leader: in some cases introverts, in other cases extroverts, depending
on the type of leadership called for; ask “what if”: introverts.
* Sir Isaac Newton, Albert Einstein, W. B. Yeats, Frédéric Chopin, Marcel Proust, J. M.
Barrie, George Orwell, Theodor Geisel (Dr. Seuss), Charles Schulz, Steven Spielberg, Larry
Page, J. K. Rowling.
* This is an informal quiz, not a scientifically validated personality test. The questions were
formulated based on characteristics of introversion often accepted by contemporary
researchers.