CHAPTER 27
Build It and They Will Come
Call it a clan, call it a network, call it a tribe, call it a family:
Whatever you call it, whoever you are, you need one.
—JANE HOWARD
As a young man, I could relate to Groucho Marx. Like the
famous comedian, I, too, had no interest in belonging to any
club that would have me as a member.
It certainly wasn't because of some misplaced belief in self-
sufficiency: I knew then how invaluable and rewarding a gather
ing of people could be. You wouldn't hear any angry grumblings
out of my mouth about not having enough time. (That excuse
kills me—what could be more important than meeting like-
minded professionals?) And I certainly wasn't shy in large crowds.
It's just that all the clubs that seemed worth attending
had their doors closed to a young, relatively unconnected man
like me.
These clubs and conferences, with their selective memberships
and aura of power, exist for good reason: People are always hun
gry to congregate with other people with similar interests, to make
a difference in their communities, and to create an environment
that makes it easier to do business. Big company CEOs realize that
to make big things happen—whether it's public policy or a big
deal with a public company—you need others. And the more
connected, powerful, and resourceful these people are, the more
you'll accomplish.
That's why the world's premier power and business gatherings,
like the World Economic Forum in Davos and Renaissance Week
end, are such tough events to get into. At Renaissance Weekend,
we've seen unknown politicians connect with the type of people
that would lead them to become nationally known figures. At
Davos, we've seen international policies formed and billion-dollar
deals hatched over a cup of Swiss coffee. Of course, most of us
can't get invited to Davos. But there are always gatherings and
clubs to which we are not, at least initially, invited.
So you can't get into the big muckety-muck party tomorrow. Big
deal. We all have the entrepreneurial spirit within us—if you can't
play on a specific mountain, there's no reason not to build your own.
My friend Richard Wurman, an architect by trade, twenty
years ago imagined how a convergence of technology, entertain
ment, and design was going to shake up the economy. "I was fly
ing a lot, and I found that the only people who were interesting to
talk to on airplanes were people in those three businesses," he has
said on many an occasion. "And that when they were talking of a
project they had passion about, they always included those other
two professions." So to bring people in these fields together, he
started the TED conference in 1984—with few attendees and his
friends as guest speakers.
Opening every year with the same line, "Welcome to the din
ner party I always wanted to have but couldn't," TED became the
perfect event—a cross between a rollicking party and a mesmeriz
ing graduate seminar. Year after year, more and more people came
from all walks of life: scientists, authors, actors, CEOs, professors.
At TED, it wouldn't be odd to see musician/producer Quincy
Jones having a chat with Newscorp CEO Rupert Murdoch, or
movie director Oliver Stone arguing with Oracle's founder and
CEO Larry J. Ellison.
From money-losing get-together to exclusive confab, TED
eventually took in upward of $3 million a year, almost all profit.
Richard paid no speaker fees and organized the event with just a
few assistants. He sold TED for $14 million in 2001, and is now
busy running a new conference called TEDmed, about the conver
gence of technology and health, which I highly recommend.
I tried to do something similar when, as a fresh-faced MBA, I
moved to Chicago after taking a job with Deloitte. I barely knew
anyone in the city. The first thing I did was ask people to introduce
me to their friends in Chicago. As I met with the people my
friends had suggested, I began to inquire what boards I could join
to get more involved in the life of the city. Doing so, I knew, would
inevitably lead to increased business for my new company.
I was so young that no one really took me seriously. The tradi
tional options, like the symphony board or country clubs, were
not open to me. I had lots of offers to join the junior boards. But
they were basically social groups. I wanted to be more of an
activist, to make a real difference in the community. I didn't just
want to host wine-tastings at a twenty-something dating mixer.
At a time like this, you have to figure out what is your U.S.P.—
"unique selling proposition," for all you non-MBA types out
there. What secret sauce can you bring to the table? Your proposi
tion can be an expertise, a hobby, or even an interest or passion for
a particular cause that will serve as the foundation from which an
entire organization or club can be established.
All clubs are based on common interests. Members are united
by a similar job, philosophy, hobby, neighborhood, or simply
because they are the same race, religion, or generation. They are
bound by a common proposition that is unique to them. They
have, in other words, a reason to hang out together.
You can take your own distinctive proposition and then take
the extra step that most people don't. Start an organization. And
invite those you want to meet to join you. Gaining members will
be easy. Like most clubs, it starts with your group of friends, who
then select their own friends. Over time, those people will bring in
even more new and intriguing people.
This is an enormously successful model that even thriving
businesses have built upon. Think about the successful Internet
sites that pooled people together around a common proposi
tion—like political affiliation, gardening, or even, in the case of
iVillage, being a woman—and built profitable enterprises on the
feeling of belonging to that community. Think, also, of airline
miles or your local grocery store where you get a discount for
being a member of a loyalty program. Building a community of
like-minded people around a common cause or interest is, and
has always been, a very compelling proposition in its own right.
In those days, my proposition came from my personal interest
in the popular business concept at the time called Total Quality
Management (TQM), which, as I've described, formed the basis of
my content that I used to differentiate myself at my first job out of
Yale and then during a stint working with one of the professors at
business school.
On a national level, the government had established an organ
ization called the Baldrige National Quality Program that rewarded
companies who exhibited excellence in TQM. In Illinois, I thought
I could create a similar nonprofit organization for local compa
nies. With a federal program already in the works, I figured it
would not be too difficult to find others with a similar interest—
judges and other members of the national organization who lived
in Chicago, consultants, and employees of big corporations whose
job it was to deal with TQM.
The first thing I needed to do was enlist the support of an insti
tution or expert in TQM in order to attract other potential mem
bers. I asked the head of TQM for First Chicago, Aleta Belltetete,
to join me as cofounder. She then pulled in her boss and one of
the most influential CEOs in Chicago at the time, Dick Thomas,
who gave us his blessing and agreed to adopt the initiative as one
he personally supported. With Dick's backing, Governor Jim
Edgar gladly assigned his Lieutenant Governor to our board. In
landing the support of these three people, our start-up organiza
tion got a big dose of credibility. Soon a whole host of people was
willing to be part of the enterprise, including the leaders of TQM
at Amoco and Rush Presbyterian Hospital, who also brought their
CEOs on board. The kicker: Because I had started the organiza
tion, I was president! Of course, now we had to create, run, and
finance this enterprise. But the hard part was now done. We were
a credible institution, and from here we all just rolled up our
sleeves and got to the nitty-gritty work, which is also critical.
Thus was born The Lincoln Award for Business Excellence
(ABE). The organization still exists today as a successful not-for-
profit foundation that assists Illinois organizations in building
sound businesses. It has hundreds and hundreds of volunteers, a
large board, and a full-time staff. Two years after I started it, I
knew every major CEO in Chicago on a first-name basis.
The lesson? Even a Harvard MBA or an invitation to Davos is
no substitute for personal initiative. If you can't find an outfit to
join that allows you to make a difference, then recognize what you
do have to offer—your particular expertise, contacts, interests, or
experience. Rally people behind them and make your own differ
ence.
The days when clubs were only for wealthy white men to con
sort with people just like themselves are over. It doesn't matter if
it's a group of carpet salespeople meeting weekly to discuss the tri
als and tribulations of their jobs; a roundtable of female Republi
cans who are dissatisfied with the stance of the state party; or a
group who share a passion for great wines and who come together
monthly to do tastings, hear vintners who are traveling through
the area, and who plan an annual trip to Napa. Whatever it is and
whoever you are don't matter.
As long as it's as an association of people with shared interests
meeting in a specified place (even if that place is cyberspace),
you'll benefit from belonging to something larger than yourself.
You and your fellow members will be strengthened by a collective
identity. And whereas with business, where boundaries of most
relationships are clearly defined by a specific project or deal and
end when that project or deal is done, membership in a club
(preferably a club you've started) will lead to friendships that will
last for years.
CONNECTORS' HALL OF FAME PROFILE
Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790)
"Can't join a club? Organize your own."
The business term networking, as it happens, joined the English lan
guage in 1966. But more than two centuries earlier, in Philadel
phia, a young Benjamin Franklin used this sweet social science to
become one of the most influential men in our as-yet-untitled nation.
Before he became a revered patriot, statesman, and inventor, he
was one of America's most successful businessmen, rising from
indentured servant to printing tycoon.
Flip your calendars, if you will, back to 1 723, at which time the
seventeen-year-old Franklin was neither wealthy nor accomplished.
He was an aspiring entrepreneur—trained in the printing trade by
his brother James—and a fresh face in Philadelphia, having moved
there after failing to find work in New York. Knowing no one in his
new town, but eager to start his own print shop, Franklin began to
flex his connecting mojo.
Within seven months, Franklin—who'd landed a job in an estab
lished print shop—made the acquaintance of Pennsylvania Gover
nor William Keith. The governor encouraged young Franklin to
travel to London to buy whatever equipment he'd need to start his
own press. Keith even promised letters of reference and credit, both
of which Franklin would need to purchase a printing press and type.
But upon reaching London, Franklin found that Keith had not fur
nished these letters. Franklin spent the next two years earning
enough money to simply sail back to America. On his return voy
age, Franklin again displayed his networking virtuosity: His first
job, back in Philadelphia, was as a clerk in the store of Thomas
Denham, a fellow passenger on his trans-Atlantic voyage.
Before long, Franklin was back in the print trade, employed in
the same established print shop as before. In the interest of intellec
tual stimulation and his own self-advancement, Franklin organized
a dozen of his friends into a Friday night social group called the
"Junto"—described, as follows, in The Autobiography.
The rules that I drew up required that every member, in his
turn, should produce one or more queries on any point of
Morals, Politics, or Natural Philosophy [physics], to be dis-
cuss'd by the company; and once in three months produce
and read an essay of his own writing, on any subject he
pleased.
The members of the Junto were young men not yet respectable or
established enough to break into the clubs that served Philadel
phia's business elite. Like Franklin, they were tradesmen, common
people. No doubt about it—the man loved clubs. Indeed, in addi
tion to its lessons of thrift, industry, and prudence, Franklin's auto
biography tells us every man should be part of a social group, if
not three. He believed that a group of like-minded, achievement-
oriented individuals could dramatically leverage each other's suc
cess to do things otherwise impossible.
Now flash those calendars forward, if you can, to 1731.
Franklin, having earned enough to start his own print shop,
invested in a small failing newspaper, the Pennsylvania Gazette.
Through snappy content and graphics (much of it written or drawn
by Franklin himself) and daring distribution, Franklin turned the
Gazette into a profitable vehicle with the largest circulation in the
colonies. The newspaper's prosperity transformed Franklin into an
eighteenth-century media magnate. Franklin gained enough
renown—and money—to apply himself to public projects, the first
of which was the establishment of the Library Company of Philadel
phia, the first circulating library in North America (still in existence).
It was the library campaign—the first of Franklin's several public
projects for Philadelphia—that gave Franklin a deep insight into
one of the crown virtues of networking. The resistance he encoun
tered, he tells us:
[M]ade me soon feel the Impropriety of presenting one's self
as the Proposer of any useful Project that might be suppos'd to
raise one's Reputation in the smallest degree above that of
one's Neighbors, when one has need of their Assistance to
accomplish that Project. I therefore put my self as much as I
could out of sight, and stated it as a Scheme of a Number of
Friends, who had requested me to go about and propose it to
such as they thought Lovers of Reading. In this way my Affair
went on more smoothly, and I ever after practis'd it on such
Occasions.
And, oh, would there be "Occasions." Following the library in
1731—for which the Junto helped Franklin find his first fifty sub
scribers—there came Philadelphia's city watch (1735); its first fire
company (1736); its first college, which would two years later
become the University of Pennsylvania (1749); its first—and also
the colonies' first hospital, through a mixture of public and private
funding (1751); and its first fire insurance company (1751).
Franklin also organized Pennsylvania's first volunteer militia (1 747)
and introduced a program of paving, lighting, and cleaning
Philadelphia's streets (1756). Each project depended upon the
assistance of Franklin's network of personal and professional con
nections, and with each project his network grew, along with his
reputation as a doer of good.
Franklin died in April 1790, about one year into George Wash
ington's first term. More than 20,000 Americans attended his
funeral.
With networking, as in so much else, we follow a trail that
Franklin blazed. From him we also learn the value of modesty and
the power of teamwork—beginning first with a group of young
tradesmen that he brought together in his Junto and ending with
the powerful men who hammered out the Declaration of Inde
pendence and the Constitution of the United States.