13 Put the Pressure on Yourself
The first requisite for success is the ability to apply your physical
and mental energies to one problem incessantly without growing
weary.
THOMAS EDISON
The world is full of people who are waiting for someone to come along and
motivate them to be the kind of people they wish they could be. The problem is
that no one is coming to the rescue.
These people are waiting for a bus on a street where no buses pass. If they
don’t take charge of their lives and put the pressure on themselves, they can end
up waiting forever. And that is what most people do.
Only about 2 percent of people can work entirely without supervision. We
call these people “leaders.” This is the kind of person you are meant to be and
that you can be, if you decide to be.
To reach your full potential, you must form the habit of putting the pressure
on yourself and not waiting for someone else to come along and do it for you.
You must choose your own frogs and then make yourself eat them in their order
of importance.
Lead the Field
See yourself as a role model. Raise the bar on yourself. The standards you set for
your own work and behavior should be higher than anyone else could set for
you.
Make a game of starting a little earlier, working a little harder, and staying a
little later. Always look for ways to go the extra mile, to do more than you are
paid for.
Your self-esteem has been defined by psychologist Nathaniel Branden as “the
reputation you have with yourself.” You build up or pull down your reputation
reputation you have with yourself.” You build up or pull down your reputation
with yourself with everything you do or fail to do. The good news is that you
feel better about yourself whenever you push yourself to do your best. You
increase your self-esteem whenever you go beyond the point where the average
person would normally quit.
Create Imaginary Deadlines
One of the best ways for you to overcome procrastination and get more things
done faster is by working as though you had only one day to get your most
important jobs done.
Imagine each day that you have just received an emergency message and that
you will have to leave town tomorrow for a month. If you had to leave town for
a month, what would you make absolutely sure that you got done before you
left? Whatever your answer, go to work on that task right now.
Another way to put pressure on yourself is to imagine that you just received
an all-expenses-paid vacation at a beautiful resort as a prize, but you will have to
leave tomorrow morning on the vacation or it will be given to someone else.
What would you be determined to finish before you left so that you could take
that vacation? Whatever it is, start on that one job immediately.
Successful people continually put the pressure on themselves to perform at
high levels. Unsuccessful people have to be instructed and pressured by others.
By putting the pressure on yourself, you will accomplish more tasks better
and faster than ever. You will become a high-performance, high-achieving
personality. You will feel terrific about yourself, and bit by bit you will build the
habit of rapid task completion that will then go on to serve you all the days of
your life.
EAT THAT FROG!
1. Set deadlines and subdeadlines on every task and activity. Create your
own “forcing system.” Raise the bar on yourself and don’t let yourself off
the hook. Once you’ve set yourself a deadline, stick to it and even try to
beat it.
2. Write out every step of a major job or project before you begin.
Determine how many minutes and hours you will require to complete each
phase. Then race against your own clock. Beat your own deadlines. Make it
a game and resolve to win!