Hi, my name is Angel, and I'm
a Program Manager at Google. I'm a mechanical
engineer by degree. My first boss out of school
said, "You're an okay engineer, but your people skills
are off the charts." Having a technical background and having really good people
skills is hard to find. Soft skills to me have a lot to do with
emotional intelligence—being able to read other people and then ultimately really
knowing yourself—and being able to read the team, read what they need, but then at the same time, what am I doing? Either influencing the
team in a good way, in a bad way, or just
a different way. Just asking, sometimes,
people that don't usually raise their hand to give
input goes a long way, because a lot of times the folks that are maybe a little
more quiet are genuinely thinking about the
problem and may have a lot of insights that if you didn't catch on that or ask
them, you could miss out. And so, to me, soft skills just means, just really understanding the emotional needs of the team. That can really help with, whether it's
estimations or costs, whether it be labor
or dollar-wise, get the full view from the team of what that
might look like. When it comes to task estimation
and time estimations, the other thing is just
asking good questions. Not just, "I need
you to go faster," but really saying, "Hey, how much faster could you
go if I gave you this? What is stopping you
from going faster? What teams would you need to get involved to help this?" or "Hey, we have an issue, are there similar issues in
other parts of this project, and do we need to get together in a larger group to
bring that together?" I think as a Program
Manager that's really your role is to see
patterns in a project and see where things are either slowing down or at
a complete stop, and having those soft
skills to be able to bring the team together
to solve that problem, and to even just see it. Just to acknowledge that there is a problem, and instead of blaming is really just digging in, and how do
we learn from this? How do we fix this?
How do we move on? Some of the things
that also help is just relating to
your team members. If you've either been
in a similar situation or just trying to understand
what their process is. Sometimes just having people walk through the estimate out loud can sometimes come up
with realizations of, we can save more time or could improve this
just by talking it out. I've been a Project Manager for machines that make labels
to locomotive engines to how you make plywood. Project management skills
don't necessarily need to be all about the
field that you're in. It's really more
about the method and the process and how you structure a team and get
people to work together.