CHAPTER 6
The Networking Jerk
Ambition can creep as well as soar.
—EDMUND BURKE
He is the man or she is the woman with a martini in one
hand, business cards in the other, and a prerehearsed eleva
tor pitch always at the ready. He or she is a schmooze artist, eyes
darting at every event in a constant search for a bigger fish to fry.
He or she is the insincere, ruthlessly ambitious glad-hander you
don't want to become.
The networking jerk is the image that many people have when
they hear the word "networking." But in my book, this breed of
hyper-Rolodex-builder and card-counter fails to grasp the nuances
of authentic connecting. Their shtick doesn't work because they
don't know the first thing about creating meaningful relationships.
As I learned the hard way.
If you knew me as a younger man, you may not have liked me.
I'm not sure I liked myself that much. I made all the classic mis
takes of youth and insecurity. I was pretty much out for myself. I
wore my unquenchable ambition on my sleeve, befriending those
above me and ignoring my peers. Too often people put on one
face with their subordinates, another with their boss, and another
one yet with their friends.
When I became responsible for marketing at Deloitte, I sud
denly had a lot of people reporting to me. I had some very big
ideas about what I wanted to do—things that never had been
done from a marketing standpoint in the world of consulting.
And now finally I had a team with which to execute them. But
instead of viewing my employees as partners to be wooed in
achieving my long-term objectives and theirs, I saw them as called
upon to carry out my tasks.
Add to this my young age (I was twenty years younger than any
other member of the executive committee), and you can under
stand why the resistance among my staff was holding all of us
back. Tasks that I thought should have taken hours ended up
taking days. I knew I needed to do something, so I reached out to
an executive coach, Nancy Badore, who had been coaching high-
level CEOs before there was a name for such a thing.
The day of our first meeting, sitting in my office, we barely had
a chance to exchange pleasantries before I blurted out, "What do I
need to do to become a great leader?"
She looked around my office for a few moments and said noth
ing. When she finally spoke, it struck me to the core. "Keith, look
at all the pictures on your wall. You talk about aspiring to become
a great leader, and there's not one picture in your whole office of
anybody but you: you with other famous people, you in famous
places, you winning awards. There's not one picture in here of
your team or of anything that might indicate what your team has
accomplished that would lead anybody like me to know that you
care for them as much as you care for yourself. Do you understand
that it's your team's accomplishments, and what they do because
of you, not for you, that will generate your mark as a leader?"
I was floored by her question. She was absolutely right. Had I
shown the genuine concern I had for the lives my employees led
outside of work? Why hadn't I made an effort to make them part
of the leadership? I'd been doing it with my bosses from day one.
I realized then my long-term success depended on everyone around
me. That I worked for them as much as they worked for me!
Politicians understand this in a way too few executives grasp:
We vote for the people we like and respect. Great companies are
built by CEOs who inspire love and admiration. In today's world,
mean guys finish last.
My friend and author Tim Sanders taught me there are two rea
sons for the end of the era of mean business. First, we live in a new
"abundance of choice in business" in everything from products to
career paths. Choice spells doom for difficult colleagues and lead
ers. "At a time when more of us have more options than ever, there's
no need to put up with a product or service that doesn't deliver, a
company that we don't like, or a boss whom we don't respect," he
writes. The second reason is what he calls the "new telegraph." "It's
almost impossible for a shoddy product, a noxious company, or a
crummy person to keep its, his, or her sad reality a secret anymore.
There are too many highly opinionated and well-informed people
with access to e-mail, instant messaging, and the Web."
The bottom line is if you don't like someone, it's easier than ever
to escape him. When you don't have others' interests at heart, people
will find out sooner rather than later. Our culture demands more of
us these days. It demands that we treat each other with respect. That
every relationship be seen in mutually beneficial terms.
When you look back upon a life and career of reaching out to
others, you want to see a web of friendships to fall back on, not the
ashes of bad encounters. Here are a few rules I can suggest from
personal experience to ensure that you never become a Network
ing Jerk:
1. Don't schmooze.
Have something to say, and say it with passion. Make sure you
have something to offer when you speak, and offer it with sincer
ity. Most people haven't figured out that it's better to spend more
time with fewer people at a one-hour get-together, and have one
or two meaningful dialogues, than engage in the wandering-eye
routine and lose the respect of most of the people you meet. I get
e-mails all the time that read, "Dear Keith, I hear you're a good
networker. I am, too. Let's sit down for fifteen minutes and a cup
of coffee." Why? I ask myself. Why in the world do people expect
me to respond to a request like that? Have they appealed to me
emotionally? Have they said they could help me? Have they
sought some snippet of commonality between us? I'm sorry, but
networking is not a secret society with some encoded handshake
practiced for its own virtue. We must bring virtue to it.
2. Don't rely on the currency of gossip.
Of course, using gossip is easier. Most people lap up such infor
mation. But it won't do you any good in the long run. Eventually
the information well will run dry as more and more people realize
you're not to be trusted.
3. Don't come to the party empty-handed.
Who are the stars of today's Internet world? Bloggers. Those free
wheeling cybernauts who set up sites and online journals to pro
vide information, links, or just empathy to a community of
like-minded individuals. They do it for free, and they're often
rewarded with a devout following of people who, in return, offer
as much as they receive. It's a loop. In connecting, as in blogging,
you're only as good as what you give away.
4. Don't treat those under you poorly.
Soon enough, some of them will become "overlings." In business,
the food chain is transient. You must treat people with respect up
and down the ladder. Michael Ovitz, the famed Hollywood super-
agent, was said to be a master networker. A scathing and relatively
recent Vanity Fair profile, with dozens of anonymous and not-so-
anonymous sources taking shots at the man, was a very public
expression of a dazzling career that had gone somehow horribly
wrong. People asked what happened? Ovitz has some amazing
interpersonal skills, but he wielded them disingenuously. People
he no longer needed he treated with indifference, or worse. It
wasn't surprising that these same people not only reveled in, but
may have also contributed to, his fall.
5. Be transparent.
"I am what I am," the cartoon character Popeye used to say. In the
information age, openness—whether it concerns your intentions,
the information you provide, or even your admiration—has
become a valuable and much-sought-after attribute. People
respond with trust when they know you're dealing straight with
them. At a conference, when I run into someone I've been dying to
meet, I don't hide my enthusiasm. "It's a pleasure to finally meet
you. I've admired your work from afar for quite some time and
been thinking how beneficial it might be if we could meet one
another." Coy games may work in a bar, but not when you're look
ing to establish a deeper, more meaningful connection.
6. Don't be too efficient.
Nothing comes off as less sincere than receiving a mass e-mail
addressed to a long list of recipients. Reaching out to others is not
a numbers game. Your goal is to make genuine connections with
people you can count on.
I'm embarrassed by the way I learned this lesson. I had always
heard that sending out holiday/New Year's greeting cards was a
good idea. So I began a practice when I graduated from Yale to send
a holiday card to everyone in my contact database. By the time I was
at Deloitte, that list was thousands of people long and I was hiring
temp help to address and even sign the cards at year's end. Well, we
all can see this coming. The intention was good enough until a col
lege roommate noted (actually gibed) how appreciative he was to
get not one but actually three cards one year ... all with different
signatures. It's not about mass, it's about a real connection.
If you're not making friends while connecting, best to resign
yourself to dealing with people who don't care much about what
happens to you. Being disliked will kill your connecting efforts
before they begin. Alternatively, being liked can be the most
potent, constructive force for getting business done.
CONNECTORS' HALL OF FAME PROFILE
Katharine Graham (1917-2001)
"Cultivate trust in everyone."
Tragedy transformed Katharine Graham from wife to publisher
overnight. She took over the Washington Post in 1 963 after the
death of her husband, Philip Graham. Her shy and quiet demeanor
seemed unfit to deal with the demands of one of the most important
newspapers in the country. Graham proved everyone wrong. She
helped to build one of the great newspapers and most successful
businesses in America. During her era, the Post published the Pen
tagon Papers, took President Nixon head-on over Watergate, and
ruled Washington's political and media scene in a style that was
inimitably her own.
In fact, it was this style that is her most lasting legacy. Running
the Post with compassion, kindness, and sincerity, Graham became
a powerful figure. Graham's influence gave her an ability to
empower others—from the highest echelons of society to its low
est—with a sense of dignity and respect.
Richard Cohen, a columnist for the Washington Post, wrote the
following a few days after Graham's funeral:
On a beastly July Sunday some years ago, I returned to
Washington from the beach and took a taxi to the parking
garage across the street from the Washington Post where I
kept my car. A tent had been erected on the Post's own park
ing lot. It was for a company party, given for people whose
names you never hear—those un-bylined, non-TV-appearing
types who take the ads or deliver the paper or maybe just
clean the building. In the heat, I saw Katharine Graham plod
ding toward the party.
She was old by then, and walking was difficult for her. She
pushed her way up the ramp, moving in a laborious fashion.
She had a farm in Virginia, a house in Georgetown, an apart
ment in New York and, most significantly that hideously hot
day, a place on the water in Martha's Vineyard. Yet here she
was—incredibly, I thought—doing the sort of thing vice presi-
dents-for-smiling do in other companies.
Analyze the life of Katharine Graham, and one inescapable
theme emerges: Despite a lifetime free from financial worry, and
a social status bordering on royalty, she made friends with
everyone—not just those who could assist her newspaper or aug
ment her position within the Beltway.
Most reports on her funeral mentioned celebrity names like
Henry Kissinger, Bill Clinton, Bill Gates, Warren Buffett, and Tom
Brokaw. But you don't have to do much heavy lifting before you find
an extensive list of non-celebrity attendees. Here's a sampling:
• Irvin Kalugdan, a Fairfax County special-education teacher who
founded a student break-dancing team with a $350 Washington
Post grant
• Rosalind Styles, from the Frederick Douglass Early Childhood and
Family Support Center, for which Graham had helped raise money
• Henrietta Barbier of Bethesda, a woman retired from the Foreign
Service, belonged to a weekly bridge club of about sixty women
at the Chevy Chase Women's Club. She said Graham never
missed a session: "She was bright about the game, and she took
lessons, and she was serious."
All of which reveals an inner truth about the skill of reaching out
to others: Those who are best at it don't network—they make
friends. They gain admirers and win trust precisely because their
amicable overtures extend to everyone. A widening circle of influ
ence is an unintended result, not a calculated aim.
Graham's relationship with former Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger, more than anyone, highlighted her flare for friendship
qua friendship, as opposed to friendship for ulterior purposes.
On the surface, the two seemed the unlikeliest of pals: After all,
the crucial moments of Graham's career were stunning blows to
Kissinger's. First, in 1971, there was Graham's decision to publish
the Pentagon Papers, confidential documents detailing the U.S.
involvement in the Vietnam War. A year later the Post, at Graham's
behest, began its Watergate investigations. Both led to the embar
rassment of the Nixon administration in which Kissinger served.
Yet there was Kissinger, the first speaker to eulogize Graham at
her funeral. He and Graham frequently attended movies together.
How did Graham form such an alliance, such a friendship? How
did she create connections with everyone from anonymous teach
ers to the world's most famous and powerful? By knowing her
boundaries and cultivating trust in others; by being discreet; by the
sincerity of her intentions; by letting the other person know she had
his or her best interests at heart.
In an interview with CNN, Kissinger remarked: "It was a strange
relationship in the sense that her paper was on the opposite side
from my views very often, but she never attempted to use our friend
ship for any benefit for her newspaper. She never asked me for spe
cial interviews or anything of that kind."