12 Identify Your Key Constraints
Concentrate all your thoughts on the task at hand. The sun’s rays
do not burn until brought to a focus.
ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL
Between where you are today and any goal or objective that you want to
accomplish, there is one major constraint that must be overcome before you can
achieve that major goal. Your job is to identify it clearly.
What is holding you back? What sets the speed at which you achieve your
goals? What determines how fast you move from where you are to where you
want to go? What stops you or holds you back from eating the frogs that can
really make a difference? Why aren’t you at your goal already?
These are some of the most important questions you will ever ask and answer
on your way to achieving high levels of personal productivity and effectiveness.
Whatever you have to do, there is always a limiting factor that determines how
quickly and well you get it done. Your job is to study the task and identify the
limiting factor or constraint within it. You must then focus all of your energies
on alleviating that single choke point.
Identify the Limiting Factor
In virtually every task, large or small, a single factor sets the speed at which you
achieve the goal or complete the job. What is it? Concentrate your mental
energies on that one key area. This can be the most productive use of your time
and talents.
This constraint may be a person whose help or decision you need, a resource
that you require, a weakness in some part of the organization, or something else.
But the limiting factor is always there, and it is always your job to find it.
For example, the purpose of a business is to create and keep customers. By
doing this in sufficient quantities, the company makes a profit and continues to

doing this in sufficient quantities, the company makes a profit and continues to
grow and flourish.
Every business has a limiting factor or choke point that determines how
quickly and well the company achieves this purpose. It may be the marketing,
the level of sales, or the sales force itself. It may be the costs of operation or the
methods of production. It may be the level of cash flow or costs. The success of
the company may be determined by the competition, the customers, or the
current marketplace. One of these factors, more than anything else, determines
how quickly the company achieves its goals of growth and profitability. What is
it?
The accurate identification of the limiting factor in any process and the focus
on that factor can usually bring about more progress in a shorter period than any
other single activity.
The 80/20 Rule Applied to Constraints
The 80/20 Rule also applies to the constraints in your life and in your work. This
means that 80 percent of the constraints, the factors that are holding you back
from achieving your goals, are internal. They are within yourself—within your
own personal qualities, abilities, habits, disciplines, or competencies. Or they are
contained within your own company or organization.
Only 20 percent of the limiting factors are external to you or to your
organization. Only 20 percent are on the outside in the form of competition,
markets, governments, or other organizations.
Your key constraint can be something small and not particularly obvious.
Sometimes you have to make a list of every step in a process and examine every
activity to determine exactly what is holding you back. Sometimes a single
negative perception or objection on the part of customers can be slowing down
the entire sales process. Sometimes the absence of a single feature can be
holding back the growth of sales of a product or service line.
Look into your company honestly. Look within your boss, your coworkers,
and members of your staff to see if there is a key weakness that is holding you or
the company back, acting as a brake on the achievement of your key goals.
Look into Yourself
Successful people always begin the analysis of constraints by asking the
question, “What is it in me that is holding me back?” They accept complete
responsibility for their lives and look to themselves for both the cause and cure

of their problems.
In your own life, you must have the honesty to look deeply into yourself for
the limiting factor or limiting skill that sets the speed at which you achieve your
personal goals. Keep asking, “What sets the speed at which I get the results I
want?”
Strive for Accuracy
The definition of the constraint determines the strategy that you use to alleviate
it. The failure to identify the correct constraint, or the identification of the wrong
constraint, can lead you off in the wrong direction. You can end up solving the
wrong problem.
A major corporation, a client of mine, was experiencing declining sales. The
corporation’s leaders concluded that the major constraint was the quality of the
sales force and the sales management. They therefore spent an enormous amount
of money reorganizing the management and retraining the salespeople.
They later found that the primary reason that sales were down was a mistake
made by an accountant who had accidentally priced their products too high
relative to their competition in the marketplace. Once the corporation revamped
its pricing, its sales went back up and it returned to profitability.
Behind every constraint or choke point, once it is located and alleviated
successfully, you will find another constraint or limiting factor. Whether you’re
trying to get to work on time in the morning or build a successful career, there
are always limiting factors and bottlenecks that set the speed of your progress.
Your job is to find them and to focus your energies on alleviating them as
quickly as possible.
Starting off your day with the removal of a key bottleneck or constraint fills
you with energy and personal power. It propels you into following through and
completing the job. Often, alleviating a key constraint or limiting factor is the
most important frog you could eat at that moment.

EAT THAT FROG!
1. Identify your most important goal in life today. What is it? What one
goal, if you achieved it, would have the greatest positive effect on your
life? What one career accomplishment would have the greatest positive
impact on your work life?
2. Determine the one constraint, internal or external, that sets the speed at
which you accomplish this goal. Ask, “Why haven’t I reached it already?
What is it in me that is holding me back?” Whatever your answers, take
action immediately. Do something. Do anything, but get started.