Hello, nice to meet you. My name is Holly and I will be your accessibility
instructor for this course. Accessibility should
be incorporated into every role at a company, whether a product designer, communicator, developer
or yes, project manager. In my role of accessibility education program
manager at Google, I help ensure all Googlers are
educated on accessibility, from building accessible
products for the entire world, to communicating
accessibility with you throughout this course. I'm deaf myself, so I am able to share my experiences
as a person with a disability too and
help others understand that having a disability
isn't a barrier in itself. It's the world around
us that we must strive to make it
accessible for everyone. Accessibility can be defined in a number of different ways. To me, it means actively
removing any barriers that might prevent persons with
disabilities from being able to access technology, information, or experiences, and leveling in the playing field so everyone has an
equal chance of enjoying life and
being successful. A disability is often defined as a physical or mental
condition that substantially limits a
major life activity, such as walking, talking, seeing, hearing, or learning. Over one billion
people in the world have a disability, 1 billion. That's more than the population of the United States, Canada, France, Italy, Japan,
Mexico, and Brazil combined. Disability is diverse
and intersectional. Someone can be born with a condition or acquire
it later in life. Disability can affect
us all in some way, whether directly or indirectly, and at any time, from permanent, like deafness, to temporary, like a broken leg, to situational, like trying to operate a TV remote
control in the dark. When you create solutions for
persons with disabilities, you are not only serving the critical audience of people with permanent
disabilities, you are also unlocking
secondary benefits for everyone who may move in and
out of disability over time. As you progress
through this course, it's also important to keep in mind your fellow classmates. Setting the expectation
that you'll be interacting with
others that learn and work differently
is a key strength of working with
accessibility in mind. Asking others what they need from you to learn and
communicate and also sharing what you need if you
have a disability yourself is important to working
well together as a team. In project management, you, yourself, people on
your project team, or people highly invested in your project may
have a disability, whether visible or invisible. As a project manager, you are responsible for making sure a group
of people can come together to achieve a common goal using shared tools and systems. In order to be successful, you need to make sure
the infrastructure and culture you set up
works for everyone. Knowing this is a key element
of project management. I'll teach you how to make your work and content accessible. I'll also help you become a better project manager by considering accessibility
in your future projects. I'll offer tips and best practices
throughout the program, starting with this one. Did you know that many
technologies that we all enjoy started out as an
accessibility feature? Think about the Google Assistant, which allows you to control
your home with your voice, or close captioning,
which makes it possible to watch the TV
above a crowded, noisy bar. By considering
accessibility, you can impact everyone's
lives for the better. I'm excited to share more with you throughout the
program where you'll learn more about
project management and prepare for a career in
this field. See you later.