Welcome back. By now you should have a
better sense of how the different parts of
the initiation come together to form the
beginnings of a project. So far, you've outlined the key components of
project initiation and, most importantly, you've
learned that a lack of preparation during this stage can lead to problems later on. We're going to continue honing your project preparation skills. Once we're done here, you'll be able to define and create project goals
and deliverables, the guiding stars
of your project. You'll also be able to
define project scope, the boundaries of your
project, that state what is and is not
part of your project. You'll be able to identify
what's in-scope and out-of-scope for a project and you'll be able to
recognize scope creep, something you'll need to keep a close eye on to help you
reach your project goal. Finally, you'll be able to
explain different ways of defining and measuring your
project's success criteria. Before we get started, I'd like to talk
through an example that we'll follow for the
rest of this course. Imagine that you're the lead project manager at Office Green, a commercial landscaping
company that specializes in plant decor for offices and other businesses. The Director of Product at Office Green has an
idea for a new service called Plant Pals to offer
high-volume customers small, low-maintenance plants,
like little cacti and leafy ferns, for their desks. As the project manager, you've been tasked with managing the roll out of this new service. As we go through this course, we'll return to your role as the project manager
at Office Green, to help teach you
about project goals, deliverables, and
success criteria. You'll also see the role your
team and stakeholders play in creating and following these three important components. At the end, you'll compile
everything you've learned into a shared document
that you can use as a portfolio to share
with future employers. After this course, you'll
move on to the next phases of the project life
cycle, and so will your Office Green project. Enjoy.