My name is John Fyle, and I'm a technical program manager for Google in the Chicago office. I've worked a couple
different companies. I've worked at startups,
I've worked at grocery companies, and I've
worked at Google. And what I've found is
at some companies, what you find is that
there's engineers that come in and what they're
looking for is direction. They want to be told what to do; they want to be handed the
task and just execute on it. At Google, people are really
invested in their product. We call Google a bottom-up kind of culture. You know, a lot of companies, you have this directive from the top saying "This is
what we're gonna do," but at Google, people
are so passionate about the industry and
what they're working on, that the ideas really come up and bubble up from the bottom. What I always tell folks is that the technical
and hard skills of program management, you
can pick up in a book. You can learn about Agile, and you can learn about
Extreme Programming. You can learn about all these things: planning, retrospectives,
all these great terms and tools
and stuff like that. At the end of the day,
that's all they are, though. They're just a tool, and you can't use a hammer for a screw. It's the same thing with
program management; you can't use the same tools for every project. You have to learn what's going on in a given team, in a given project, and a
given group of people. And so at the end of the day,
really the challenge is understanding the dynamics of the people that you work with. I like to say that the key about program management is
people and contexts. You have to understand the people that
you're working with, you have to understand
the context, and only then can you apply the
skills that you learned. You won't always have
the opportunity to pick and choose what people you
want to work on a project, and that's okay, because you can just use those tools
that you've gained in the past to understand
the backgrounds and the style and the personalities of the people that
you're working with. The most important part
about program management is understanding the
personalities of the people you work with so
that you can tailor your approach to make
sure that you're working effectively with them.
Think about it this way. You might be working with
an introverted person. That person needs
different types of attention that an
extroverted person. An extroverted person
wants to talk about their ideas and their
product plans in a meeting. An introverted person,
you might want to get their feedback
offline or to have an async kind of forum opportunity for them
to voice their opinion. It's really not going to be cut and dry every time
you work on a project, and that's why it's really, really important that you're
flexible in your approach. You want to have people that are challenging the
choices that we make. But at the end of the day,
we all need to agree on a common goal and a common vision so that we
can move forward. We don't want distractions because that's the thing
that the one thing that can slow things
down. At the end of the day, technical problems
aren't that hard. People problems are really hard. And making sure that your team
is sold and bought in on a vision and the project
is super, super important. It's your goal and
your job role as a program manager to
motivate the team and make sure that
everyone's on the same page.