Imagine you wanna build a house. Your first step likely wouldn't be picking up a hammer and nails; first, you'd plan things out. You'd set a budget, you'd review
blueprints, and you'd know what you want the house to
look like when it's all done. Building a project follows
the same structure. In this case, the plans are
called a project charter. As you've learned, a project
charter is a formal document that clearly defines the project
and outlines the necessary details to reach the project's goals. Gen AI tools can help you
build a great project charter and save you time. Let's go ahead and give it a try. To start, my prompt
could say something like, act as a project manager
and build a project charter that includes the information below. Add placeholders for
any missing information. For this example, I have
details about my project in a different document,
including a description of the project, the
business need, deliverables, the project stakeholders,
and the success criteria. I'm going to copy and paste
this information into Gemini to give more detail to my prompt. Including details like these
in my prompt is important. I'm not just typing in a request. I'm also supplying critical information for Gemini to respond to. In this case, it's information
about my planned project, and here we go. This project charter from Gemini gives me a good starting point. There's still work to do. Many of these bullets should
be expanded into full sentences and there's more detail
that I need to add in, but I'm off to a great start. Remember, the more information
I give Gemini to begin with, the more complete it can
make the project charter. But this output gives me a
solid place to start from. Here are a few things to keep in mind as you build a project charter
with help from a gen AI tool. First, gen AI can create a
lot of content very quickly and in different formats. This can be really useful
as a project manager when you need to create documentation like a project charter. Second, if you have an existing template for project charters that
you like, you can share it with Gemini, or you can
provide Gemini with guidance about the format of the project
charter you'd like to see. For example, you can
specify the number of pages or sections that you want to be included. Remember, read responses closely. If you just skim the
output, it might look good, but it might actually include
something you didn't intend. Gen AI may be doing the heavy lifting, but you still need to do
the heavy thinking here. Remember the prompt framework
we discussed earlier? Here's where the E for
Evaluate comes into play. Also, you can experiment
with different prompts by changing the wording and formatting. This experimentation will go a long way towards improving the
outputs and giving you more options to work with. Be willing to try again and be deliberate with your instructions. This is the I in our
framework for Iterate, which is the process of
refining and improving your AI prompts and outputs
through repeated cycles of testing and adjustment. You can refine or vary the prompt to get the most accurate and useful
results, and to find out if you can get other
responses that you prefer. On that note, let's take a moment to dig a bit deeper into Iteration. A few tips. When you evaluate your
prompt, did you find any areas where the output didn't
align to your expectations? If so, there may be opportunities
to provide the AI tool with more specific guidance
about what you need. Remember, an AI tool
can only provide results based on what you tell it to do, so make sure your prompt has enough detail to get a useful response, or, think back to the R in our prompting
framework, References. Can you share an example
of what you're expecting? Providing examples in your prompts can help the AI tool
understand what you want. If you're hoping to find a specific format or type of analysis, show
the AI tool an example. Another thing you can do
is check your phrasing. Were you as clear as possible? Try breaking your instructions
into shorter sentences. This can help you improve
the output next time. Are there parts of the
output that you did like? For example, imagine the
AI tool gave you five ideas for a brainstorm and
you liked two of them. In your next prompt, explain
why you like those two and ask the AI tool to provide a new list of ideas
based on your reasoning. You could even point
out why you didn't like the other three ideas and ask the tool to take that into account
for the next time around. So, let's think back on our example, using Gemini to help
write a project charter. How could we iterate in
this particular scenario? One way might be to ask a follow-up prompt to get Gemini to use
less technical language, or I could ask Gemini
to shorten or lengthen particular sections, or I could ask Gemini to help make the project
charter more complete. For example, I could ask if
any important information is missing from what
we originally provided that would create a
stronger project charter. It might take some practice to get results you're happy with. Playing and experimenting
with prompts is the best way to figure out how to get
results that are useful for you. Getting the output you want
can sometimes take a few steps, and the only way to get
there is to get comfortable, explore and learn what path works for you. Go ahead and try creating a
project charter of your own.