Initiating Process Group
The processes in the Initiating Process Group are shown in Table 4-1.
Table 4-1. Initiating Process Group Processes
Initiating Processes
4.1 Develop Project Charter 4.2 Identify Stakeholders
These processes define a new project or a new phase of an existing project by obtaining
authorization to start the project or phase. The purpose of this Process Group is to align stakeholder
expectations and the project purpose, inform stakeholders of the scope and objectives, and discuss
how their participation in the project and its associated phases can help to ensure their expectations
are met. The initial scope is defined and initial financial resources are committed. Stakeholders who
will interact and influence the overall outcome of the project are identified. The project manager is
appointed if not already assigned. This information is captured in the project charter and stakeholder
register. When the project charter is approved, the project is officially authorized, and the project
manager is authorized to apply organizational resources to the project activities.
The key benefits of this Process Group are that only projects that are aligned with the
organization’s strategic objectives are authorized and the business case, benefits, and stakeholders
are considered from the start of the project. In some organizations, the project manager is involved in
developing the business case and defining the benefits. In those organizations, the project manager
generally helps write the project charter; in other organizations, the pre-project work is done by the
project sponsor, project management office (PMO), portfolio steering committee, or other stakeholder
group. This practice guide assumes the project has been approved by the sponsor or other governing
body and the business documents have been reviewed prior to authorizing the project. In most cases,
business documents originate outside of the project, but are used as inputs to the project.
Business documents are documents that are generally originated outside of the project but
are used as inputs to the project. Examples of business documents include the business case and
Involve Stakeholders
benefits management plan. Figure 4-1 shows the sponsor and the business documents in relation
to the Initiating Processes. Involving the sponsors, customers, and other stakeholders during initiation creates a shared
understanding of success criteria. It also increases the likelihood of deliverable acceptance when
the project is complete and stakeholder satisfaction throughout the project.
Project
Boundaries
Monitoring &
Controlling Processes
End
Planning Deliverables
Processes Users
Business
Sponsor Initiating Closing
Documents Processes Processes
Organiza-
Project tional
Executing Records Process
Processes
Assets
Figure 4-1. Project Boundaries
Projects are often divided into phases. When this is done, information from processes in the
Initiating Process Group is reexamined to determine if the information is still valid. Revisiting the
Initiating processes at the start of each phase helps keep the project focused on the business need
that the project was undertaken to address. The project charter, business documents, and success
criteria are verified. The influence drivers, expectations, and objectives of the project stakeholders
are reviewed.
Involve Stakeholders
Involving the sponsors, customers, and other stakeholders during initiation creates a shared
understanding of success criteria. It also increases the likelihood of deliverable acceptance when
the project is complete and stakeholder satisfaction throughout the project.
4.1 DEVELOP PROJECT CHARTER
Develop Project Charter is the process for developing the document that formally authorizes
the existence of a project and provides the project manager with the authority to apply organizational
resources to project activities. The key benefits of this process are:
▶ Provides a direct link between the project and the strategic objectives of the organization,
▶ Creates a formal record of the project, and
▶ Shows the organizational commitment to the project.
This process is performed once or at predefined points in the project. The inputs, tools and techniques,
and outputs are shown in Figure 4-2. Figure 4-3 presents the data flow diagram for this process.
Develop Project Charter
Inputs Tools & Techniques Outputs
1. Business documents 1. Expert judgment 1. Project charter
• Business case 2. Data gathering 2. Assumption log
• Benefits management plan • Brainstorming
2. Agreements • Focus groups
3. Enterprise environmental • Interviews
factors 3. Interpersonal and team skills
4. Organizational process assets • Conflict management
• Facilitation
• Meeting management
4. Meetings
Note: This figure provides the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs that may be used for
this process. Descriptions for inputs and outputs appear in Section 9. Descriptions for tools
and techniques appear in Section 10.
Figure 4-2. Develop Project Charter: Inputs, Tools & Techniques, and Outputs
D B o u cu si m ne e s n s ts Sta I k d e e 4 h n .2 o ti l f d y ers D M ev a e n lo a 5 p g . e 1 P m ro e j n e t ct M P a la n n a 5 g S . e 2 c m op e e nt
Plan
5.3
Collect
Requirements
Business documents
• Business case
• Benefits management plan
5.4
Define Scope
4.1 • Project charter
• Agreements
Develop Project
Charter
5.6
Plan Schedule
Management
• Enterprise environmental factors • Assumption log
• Organizational process assets
5.11
Project Plan Cost
Documents Management
5.14
Enterprise/ Plan Quality
Organization Management
5.15
Plan Resource
Management
5.24 5.17
8.1 5.23 5.18
Plan Plan
Close Project Plan Procurement Plan Risk
Stakeholder Communications
or Phase Management Management
Engagement Management
Note: This figure provides the inputs and outputs that may be used for this process. Descriptions for inputs
and outputs appear in Section 9.
Figure 4-3. Develop Project Charter: Data Flow Diagram
The project charter establishes a partnership between the performing and requesting
organizations. In the case of external projects, a formal contract is typically the preferred way
to establish an agreement. A project charter may still be used to establish internal agreements
within an organization to ensure proper delivery under the contract. The approved project charter
formally initiates the project. A project manager is identified and assigned as early in the project
as is feasible, preferably while the project charter is being developed and always prior to the
start of planning. The project charter can be developed by the sponsor or the project manager
in collaboration with the initiating entity. This collaboration allows the project manager to have a
better understanding of the project purpose, objectives, and expected benefits. This understanding
will better allow for efficient resource allocation to project activities. The project charter provides
the project manager with the authority to plan, execute, and control the project.
Projects are initiated by an entity external to the project such as a sponsor, program, or project
management office (PMO), or a portfolio governing body chairperson or authorized representative.
The project initiator or sponsor should be at a level that is appropriate to procure funding and
commit resources to the project. Projects are initiated due to internal business needs or external
influences. These needs or influences often trigger the creation of a needs analysis, feasibility study,
business case, or description of the situation that the project will address. Chartering a project
validates alignment of the project to the strategy and ongoing work of the organization. A project
charter is not considered to be a contract because there is no consideration or money promised
or exchanged in its creation.
4.2 IDENTIFY STAKEHOLDERS
Identify Stakeholders is the process of identifying project stakeholders regularly and analyzing
and documenting relevant information regarding their interests, involvement, interdependencies,
influence, and potential impact on project success. The key benefit of this process is that it enables
the project team to identify the appropriate focus for engagement of each stakeholder or group of
stakeholders.
This process is performed periodically throughout the project as needed. The inputs, tools and
techniques, and outputs are shown in Figure 4-4. Figure 4-5 presents the data flow diagram for
this process.
Identify Stakeholders
Inputs Tools & Techniques Outputs
1. Project charter 1. Expert judgment 1. Stakeholder register
2. Business documents 2. Data gathering 2. Change requests
• Business case • Questionnaires and surveys 3. Project management plan
• Benefits management plan • Brainstorming updates
3. Project management plan 3. Data analysis • Requirements management
• Communications • Stakeholder analysis plan
management plan • Document analysis • Communications
• Stakeholder engagement 4. Data representation management plan
plan • Stakeholder mapping/ • Risk management plan
4. Project documents representation • Stakeholder engagement
• Change log 5. Meetings plan
• Issue log 4. Project documents updates
• Requirements • Assumption log
documentation • Issue log
5. Agreements • Risk register
6. Enterprise environmental
factors
7. Organizational process assets
Note: This figure provides the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs that may be used for
this process. Descriptions for inputs and outputs appear in Section 9. Descriptions for tools
and techniques appear in Section 10.
Figure 4-4. Identify Stakeholders: Inputs, Tools & Techniques, and Outputs
4.1
Develop
Project Charter
• Project charter
Project
Management Project
Plan Management
Plan
Project management plan updates
• Requirements management plan
Project management plan • Communications management plan
• Communications management plan • Risk management plan
• Stakeholder engagement plan • Stakeholder engagement plan
4.2
Project
Identify
Documents
Stakeho•l Pdreojresc t • Stakeholder register
charter
Project documents
• Change log Project
• Issue log
Documents
• Requirements documentation Project documents updates
• Assumption log
• Issue log
• Risk register
Business
Documents
7.2
Perform
Integrated
• Business case • Change requests Change Control
• Benefits management plan
6.9
Conduct
Procurements
• Agreements
Enterprise/
Organization
• Enterprise environmental factors
• Organizational process assets
Note: This figure provides the inputs and outputs that may be used for this process.
Descriptions for inputs and outputs appear in Section 9.
Figure 4-5. Identify Stakeholders: Data Flow Diagram
This process frequently occurs for the first time in a project either prior to or at the same time
the project charter is developed and approved. It is repeated as necessary but should be performed
at the start of each phase and when a significant change in the project or the organization occurs.
Each time the identification process is repeated, the project management plan components and
project documents should be consulted to identify relevant project stakeholders.