CHAPTER 2
Don't Keep Score
There is no such thing as a "self-made" man. We are made up of
thousands of others. Everyone who has ever done a kind deed for
us, or spoken one word of encouragement to us, has entered into
the make-up of our character and of our thoughts, as well as our
success.
—GEORGE BURTON ADAMS
When I give talks to college and grad students, they always
ask me, What are the secrets to success? What are the
unspoken rules for making it big? Preferably, they'd like my
response wrapped up in a tight package and tied with a neat little
bow. Why not? I wanted the same thing at their age.
"So you want the inside scoop," I respond. "Fair enough. I'll
sum up the key to success in one word: generosity."
Then I pause, watching the faces of the kids in the crowd as
they look back at me with quizzical expressions. Half the group
thinks I'm about to tell them a joke; the other half thinks they
would have been better off getting a beer rather than attending
my talk.
I go on to explain that when I was young, my father, a Pennsyl
vania steelworker, wanted more for me than he ever had. And
he expressed this desire to a man whom up until that moment
he had never met, the CEO of his company, Alex McKenna.
Mr. McKenna liked my dad's moxie and helped me get a scholar
ship to one of the best private schools in the country, where he was
a trustee.
Later, Elsie Hillman, chairwoman of the Pennsylvania Repub
lican Party, whom I first met after she read in the New York Times
about my unsuccessful bid for New Haven City Council in my
sophomore year at Yale, lent me money and advice and encour
aged me to attend business school.
By the time I was your age, I tell the students, I had been
afforded one of the best educational opportunities in the world,
almost purely through the generosity of others.
"But," I continue, "here's the hard part: You've got to be more
than willing to accept generosity. Often, you've got to go out and
ask for it."
Now I get that look of instant recognition. Almost everyone in
the room has had to reach out for help to get a job interview, an
internship, or some free advice. And most have been reluctant to
ask. Until you become as willing to ask for help as you are to give
it, however, you are only working half the equation.
That's what I mean by connecting. It's a constant process
of giving and receiving—of asking for and offering help. By
putting people in contact with one another, by giving your time
and expertise and sharing them freely, the pie gets bigger for
everyone.
This karma-tinged vision of how things work may sound naive
to those who have grown cynical of the business world. But while
the power of generosity is not yet fully appreciated, or applied, in
the halls of corporate America, its value in the world of networks
is proven.
For example, I enjoy giving career advice and counseling. It's
almost a hobby. I've done this with hundreds of young people,
and I get enormous satisfaction hearing from them later on as
their careers progress. There are times when I can a make a big dif
ference in a young person's life. I can open a door or place a call or
set up an internship—one of those simple acts by which destinies
are altered. But too often the offer is refused.
The recipient will say, "Sorry, but I can't accept the favor
because I'm not sure I'll ever be able to repay you"; or "I'd rather
not be obligated to anyone, so I'll have to pass." Sometimes, they'll
insist right there and then that they return the favor somehow. To
me, nothing is as infuriating as encountering such blindness
about how things work. Nor is it, as one might assume, a genera
tional issue. I've gotten similar reactions from people of all ages
and in all walks of life.
A network functions precisely because there's recognition of
mutual need. There's an implicit understanding that investing
time and energy in building personal relationships with the
right people will pay dividends. The majority of "one percenters,"
as I call the ultra-rich and successful whom many of my mentees
aspire toward, are one percenters because they understand this
dynamic—because, in fact, they themselves used the power of
their network of contacts and friends to arrive at their present
station.
But to do so, first you have to stop keeping score. You can't
amass a network of connections without introducing such con
nections to others with equal fervor. The more people you help,
the more help you'll have and the more help you'll have helping
others. It's like the Internet. The more people who have access, and
use it, the more valuable the Internet becomes. I now have a small
army of former mentees, succeeding in any number of industries,
helping me to mentor the young people that come to me today.
This is not softhearted hokum; it's an insight that hard-headed
business people would do well to take seriously. We live in an
interdependent world. Flattened organizations seek out strategic
alliances at every turn. A growing pool of free agents are finding
they need to work with others to accomplish their goals. More
than ever before, zero-sum scenarios where only one party wins
often mean, in the long run, that both parties will lose. Win/win
has become a necessary reality in a networked world. In a hyper-
connected marketplace, cooperation is gaining ground on compe
tition.
The game has changed.
In 1956, William Whyte's bestselling book The Organization
Man outlined the archetypal American worker: We donned our
gray suit for a large corporation, offering our loyalty in exchange
for job security. It was glorified indentured servitude, with few
options and few opportunities. Today, however, employers offer
little loyalty, and employees give none. Our careers aren't paths so
much as landscapes that are navigated. We're free agents, entre
preneurs, and intrapreneurs—each with our own unique brand.
Many people have adapted to these new times with the belief
that it's still a dog-eat-dog world, where the meanest, baddest
dog in the neighborhood wins. But nothing could be further from
the truth.
Where employees once found generosity and loyalty in the
companies we worked for, today we must find them in a web of
our own relationships. It isn't the blind loyalty and generosity we
once gave to a corporation. It's a more personal kind of loyalty
and generosity, one given to your colleagues, your team, your
friends, your customers.
Today, we need each other more than ever.
Sadly, plenty of people still function as if it were 1950. We have
a tendency to romanticize independence. Most business literature
still views autonomy as a virtue, as though communication, team
work, and cooperation were lesser values. To such thinkers, inter
dependence is just a variation of outright dependence. In my
experience, such a view is a career-killer.
Autonomy is a life vest made out of sand. Independent people
who do not have the skills to think and act interdependently may
be good individual producers, but they won't be seen as good
leaders or team players. Their careers will begin to stutter and stall
before too long.
Let me give you an example. When I was at Deloitte, I was
working on a project for the largest HMO in the country, Kaiser
Permanente, forcing me to travel between their two headquarters
in San Francisco and Los Angeles, and back to my home in
Chicago on the weekend.
It was clear to me early on that I hoped to use the consulting
world as a gateway into some other field. Since I was in Los Ange
les, I wondered how I might begin to create inroads into the enter
tainment industry. I wasn't looking to accomplish anything in
particular; I just knew that I was interested in the industry, and
when the day came to move on, I wanted to break into Hollywood
without having to deliver some agent's mail.
Ray Gallo, my best friend from my undergraduate days, was
practicing law in Los Angeles, so I called him to get some advice.
"Hey, Ray. Who do you know in the entertainment world that
I can talk to for some advice about breaking into the industry? You
know any people who'd be open for a short lunch?"
"There's a guy named David who I know through mutual
friends who also went to HBS. Give him a call."
David was a smart entrepreneur doing some creative deals in
Hollywood. In particular, he had a close connection with a senior
executive at one of the studios whom he had also gone to school
with. I was hoping I might get a chance to get to know both of them.
David and I met for a cup of coffee at an outdoor cafe in Santa
Monica. He was dressed in very dapper casual L.A. attire. I wore a
suit and tie, befitting the buttoned-down Midwestern consultant
that I was at the time.
After a good deal of back-and-forth, I asked David a question.
"I'm thinking about transitioning into the entertainment
industry at some point. Is there anyone you know who you think
could lend some helpful advice?" I was a good friend of a close
friend of his. This seemed like a mild request given the strength of
our meeting.
"I do know somebody," he told me. "She is a senior executive at
Paramount."
"Great, I'd love to meet her," I said excitedly. "Is there any
chance of arranging a quick introduction? Maybe you could pass
on an e-mail?"
"I can't," he told me flatly. I was shocked, and my face showed
it. "Keith, here's the situation. It's likely that at some point I'm
going to need something from this person or want to ask a per
sonal favor. And I'm just not interested in using the equity that I
have with this individual on you, or anyone else, for that matter. I
need to save that for myself. I'm sorry. I hope you understand."
But I didn't understand. I still don't. His statement flew in the
face of everything I knew. He thought of relationships as finite,
like a pie that can only be cut into so many pieces. Take a piece
away, and there was that much less for him. I knew, however, that
relationships are more like muscles—the more you work them,
the stronger they become.
If I'm going to take the time to meet with somebody, I'm going
to try to make that person successful. But David kept score. He
saw every social encounter in terms of diminishing returns. For
him, there was only so much goodwill available in a relationship
and only so much collateral and equity to burn.
What he didn't understand was that it's the exercising of equity
that builds equity. That's the big "ah-ha" that David never seemed
to have learned.
Jack Pidgeon, the headmaster of the Kiski School in southwest
ern Pennsylvania, where I went to high school, taught me that les
son. He'd built an entire institution on his asking people not
"How can you help me?" but "How can I help youT
One of the many times Jack came to my aid was when I was a
sophomore in college. I'd been enlisted to work during the sum
mer for a woman who was running for Congress against a young
Kennedy. Running against a Kennedy in Boston, and for Jack
Kennedy's former congressional seat to boot, was for many people
a lost cause. But I was young and naive and ready for battle.
Unfortunately, we barely had time to don our armor before we
were forced to wave the white flag of surrender. A month into the
campaign, we ran out of money. Eight other college kids and I
were literally thrown out of our hotel room, which doubled as our
campaign headquarters, in the middle of the night by a general
manager who had not been paid in too long a time.
We decided to pack our duffel bags into a rented van, and not
knowing what else to do, we headed to Washington, D.C. We
innocently hoped we could latch onto another campaign. Boy, we
were green.
In the middle of the night, at some anonymous rest stop on the
way to Washington, I called Mr. Pidgeon from a pay phone. When
I told him about our situation, he chuckled. Then he proceeded to
do what he has done for several generations of Kiski alums. He
opened his Rolodex and started making calls.
One of those people he called was Jim Moore, a Kiski alum
who was the former Assistant Secretary of Commerce in the Rea
gan administration. By the time our caravan of lost souls made it
to D.C, we all had places to stay and we were on our way to get
ting summer jobs. I'm pretty sure that Mr. Pidgeon had made a
few similar calls for Jim in his day.
Mr. Pidgeon understood the value of introducing people to
people, Kiski boy to Kiski boy. He knew not only the impact it
would have on our individual lives, but that the loyalty such acts
engender would ultimately reap rewards for the nearly bankrupt,
small, five-building facility in southwestern Pennsylvania he was
trying to establish.
And so it has. Jim and I are now on the Board of Directors at
our alma mater. And if you were around when Jack first took over
the school, today you'd barely recognize the place, with its ski
slopes, golf course, fine arts center, and the sort of sophisticated
technology that makes it look like some midwestern MIT.
My point is this: Relationships are solidified by trust. Institu
tions are built on it. You gain trust by asking not what people can
do for you, to paraphrase an earlier Kennedy, but what you can do
for others.
In other words, the currency of real networking is not greed
but generosity.
When I look back on all the people who have taught me invalu
able lessons about creating lasting relationships—my father, Elsie,
my mentees and the college kids I speak with, Ray, Mr. Pidgeon, the
people I've worked with—I come away with several fundamental
insights and observations:
1. Yesterday we had the new economy. Today we have the old
economy (again!), and no one can predict what's going to be
thrown at us next. Business cycles ebb and flow; your friends
and trusted associates remain. A day might well come when
you step into your boss's office some afternoon to hear, "I'm
sorry to have to tell you this, but..." Tough day, guaranteed.
The experience will be a whole lot easier to handle, however, if
you can make a few calls and walk into someone's office soon
after to hear, "I've been waiting for this day to come for a long
time. Congratulations ..."
Job security? Experience will not save you in hard times,
nor will hard work or talent. If you need a job, money, advice,
help, hope, or a means to make a sale, there's only one surefire,
fail-safe place to find them—within your extended circle of
friends and associates.
2. There's no need to ponder whether it's their lunch or yours.
There's no point in keeping track of favors done and owed.
Who cares?
Would it surprise you if I told you "Hollywood" David
isn't doing that well any longer? David hoarded the relational
equity he had until he eventually looked around and discov
ered there was nothing more to hoard. Ten years after I met
him at that Santa Monica cafe, I haven't heard from him. In
fact, no one else I know has heard from him either. Like so
many industries, entertainment is a small world.
Bottom line: It's better to give before you receive. And
never keep score. If your interactions are ruled by generosity,
your rewards will follow suit.
3. The business world is a fluid, competitive landscape; yester
day's assistant is today's influence peddler. Many of the young
men and women who used to answer my phones now thank
fully take my calls. Remember, it's easier to get ahead in the
world when those below you are happy to help you get ahead,
rather than hoping for your downfall.
Each of us is now a brand. Gone are the days where your
value as an employee was linked to your loyalty and seniority.
Companies use branding to develop strong, enduring relation
ships with customers. In today's fluid economy, you must do
the same with your network.
I would argue that your relationships with others are your
finest, most credible expression of who you are and what you
have to offer. Nothing else compares.
4. Contribute. It's like Miracle-Gro for networks. Give your time,
money, and expertise to your growing community of friends.
5. In thinking about what Jack Pidgeon did for me and countless
others, and the legacy he will leave behind because of it, I've
become more convinced than ever that sharing what I've
learned from him about reaching out to others is the greatest
way to repay my former headmaster. Thanks again, Mr.
Pidgeon.