Hi, folks. My name is Ben, and I am a
staff program manager at Google. My favorite part of the job
is solving complex problems with really powerful teams. AI is a massive change for
everything we're gonna be doing. Key thing is getting ahead of it, learning what it can do
and what it can't do, and really understanding,
okay, this is great, AI is great for this particular thing, but it won't work there. And knowing what it can
do is gonna help you, as the project manager, be
substantially more successful. There are so many things
you do as a project manager that AI should just up your game. And the cool thing about AI is it can really tune your
ability to communicate well. So I use it constantly, like
when I'm writing complex emails or executive emails, I
use AI to double check it or revise my writing, or give
me better wording in there, and it just makes what I deliver better. When I'm stuck in a problem and trying to figure something out, often I'll have a lot of ideas, but they just don't quite fit, or I need someone to talk to, and when my teammates are not around to kinda chat about these things, the cool thing is I can go to AI and I can throw these
things at it and say, "I've got these ideas,
and this is the problem, and here's what I'm trying to solve." And it comes back with
dozens of interesting ideas that I can now synergize into what I need and build an excellent result. One interesting thing
that I used GenAI for was I was brainstorming how
to talk about my program. What was the word, what
was the elevator pitch, and how I would best present it? And I had a lot of words and paragraphs of what it was about,
and so on and so forth. And I'm like, I had to narrow it down, and it was really hard
for me to figure it out. So I threw that at the
AI engine and I said, "Please do this in like, one sentence, and gimme an elevator pitch,
and make it energetic, and make sure it catches the attention and doesn't miss salient information." And it gave me back
like, multiple examples, and I was able to then tune that one and had a really super
tight elevator pitch that I was able to use for teams whenever I'm describing it to them. For anyone who's starting to
use AI in project management, I would consider three things. One, feel free to experiment. Try things out, try different tools, try different approaches,
try different prompting. You'd be amazed at the
cool things you discover. And sometimes they don't work, and sometimes they're gonna work substantially better than you think. The second thing is make
sure you're being safe. Both the content you're using and the validation you're using, make sure you're doing the right thing, putting the right content in and getting the right content out. And then the third thing is
compare notes with others. You'd be surprised how many things you're gonna learn from your colleagues who are also trying this out, and how much they're gonna learn from you, and you're just gonna build on top of each other's experience. AI is a huge deal for anyone in business, and in project management even more so. Not only does it help you in your job, but it's a great companion
to help you discover and leverage new insights
that you never thought about.