CHAPTER 11
Never Eat Alone
The dynamics of a network are similar to those of a would-be
celebrity in Hollywood: Invisibility is a fate far worse than
failure. It means that you should always be reaching out to others,
over breakfast, lunch, whatever. It means that if one meeting hap
pens to go sour, you have six other engagements lined up just like
it the rest of the week.
In building a network, remember: Above all, never, ever
disappear.
Keep your social and conference and event calendar full. As an
up-and-comer, you must work hard to remain visible and active
among your ever-budding network of friends and contacts.
Let me give you an example of what I mean. A few years back,
I got the opportunity to travel with then First Lady Hillary Clin
ton on a C130 troop carrier, crisscrossing the Southwest from one
political event to another. She was up at 5 in the morning for
breakfast and phone calls back to the East Coast. She gave at least
four or five speeches, attended a few cocktail parties where she
constantly reached out to scores of individuals, and visited several
people's homes. She must have touched 2,000 hands that day
alone. At the end of the night, when most of our entourage strug
gled to get back on Air Force One, she huddled her staff, sat up
cross-legged, and began to joke and chitchat with them about all
that happened that day. An hour or so of frivolity, and Mrs. Clin
ton moved on to scheduling the next day. No matter what your
politics, you have to respect that kind of determination and sheer
work ethic. I was shocked by the number of individuals she
remembered by name along the trip. I was having a tough enough
time with remembering everyone's name in our group.
I see examples of this kind of persistence and determination
everywhere. My particular heroes, because of my background, are
those people who came from humble origins. A fellow CEO friend
came from a blue-collar family in the Midwest—his father, like
mine, was a laborer for forty-odd years. He'll tell you he isn't the
smartest guy in the room, he doesn't have the Ivy League pedigree
of his colleagues, and he hasn't climbed the greasy pole by getting
a boost from his family. But today, he is one of the most respected
CEOs in his industry.
His formula is not complicated, but it is rigorous. He talks to at
least fifty people each day. He spends hours a week walking his
company plant talking to employees up and down the ladder. If
you send an e-mail to him or his assistant, you can be sure there
will be a response within hours. He attributes his success to the
blue-collar work ethic and sensibilities he was raised with by his
father. About his more starched white-collar colleagues, he once
told me that while he had learned what these people know, they
would never have an opportunity to learn what he knew.
Now, you have to work hard to be successful at reaching out
to others, but that doesn't mean you have to work long. There
is a difference. Some people think building a network requires
eighteen-hour days slogging through meetings and phone calls. If
I'm slogging, or even if it feels like slogging, I'm not doing my
job—at least not well. Or perhaps I'm in the wrong job. Building
a network of friends and colleagues is about building relation
ships and friendships. It should be fun, not time-consuming.
When your network is set, your goals written down, you'll find
plenty of hours during the day to do what needs to be done.
How do I meet everyone I want to meet during the course of a
week? Someone once remarked cynically, "I'd have to clone myself
to take all the meetings you take."
"Ah, you're onto something," I responded. "I don't clone
myself. I clone the event."
Here's what I mean. A few months ago, I flew into New York for
a two-day business stint. There were a number of people I wanted
to see: an old client and friend of mine who was the former presi
dent of Lego and was now trying to figure out what he wanted to do
with the rest of his life, the COO of Broadway Video, with whom I
wanted to discuss a new branded entertainment TV show for one of
my clients, and a close friend that I hadn't seen in too long.
I had two days, three people I wanted to see, and only one
available time slot to see them all. How do you manage a situation
like this?
I "cloned" the dinner and invited all of them to join me. Each
would benefit from knowing the others, and I'd be able to catch
up with all of them and perhaps even get some creative input
about the new TV show. My friend, who has a fantastic sense of
humor, would enjoy the group and add a little levity to what
might have been just a stodgy business meeting.
I asked my friend to join me a half hour in advance at the hotel
I was staying at for a little one-on-one time. And if the details of
the project I was discussing with the COO were private, I might
schedule a little one-on-one time with him after dinner.
The point is I'm constantly looking to include others in what
ever I'm doing. It's good for them, good for me, and good for
everyone to broaden their circle of friends. Sometimes I'll take
potential employees for a workout and conduct the interview over
a run. As a makeshift staff meeting, I'll occasionally ask a few
employees to share a car ride with me to the airport. I figure out
ways to as much as triple my active working day through such
multitasking. And, in the process, I'm connecting people from dif
ferent parts of my "community."
The more new connections you establish, the more opportuni
ties you'll have to make even more new connections. As Robert
Metcalfe, the inventor of Ethernet, says: The value of a network
grows proportional to the square of the number of its users. In the
case of the Internet, every new computer, every new server, and
every new user added expands the possibilities for everyone else
who's already there. The same principle holds true in growing
your web of relationships. The bigger it gets, the more attractive it
becomes, and the faster it grows. That's why I say that a network is
like a muscle—the more you work it, the bigger it gets.
Such cloning is also a good way to ensure that a meeting or get-
together is worthwhile. If I'm meeting someone whom I don't
know that well, I might invite someone I do know just to make
sure the meeting does not become a waste of time. Mentees, for
instance, get a special kick out of sitting in on such meetings—
and it can be a great learning opportunity. It gets them face time
with me, they get a chance to see business in action, and I make
sure our reason for the meeting gets accomplished. In most cases,
they end up contributing something to the meeting as well. Don't
underestimate young people's ability to find creative new insight.
When you try this sort of thing, pay special attention to the
chemistry between people. Do you have a sense of who will get on
well with each other? It doesn't mean that everyone has to have the
same background and sensibility. In fact, a nice mix of different
professions and personalities can be the perfect recipe for a terrific
gathering. Trust your instincts. One litmus test I often use is to ask
myself if I think I'll have fun. If the answer is yes, that is usually a
good sign that the dynamic will work.
Have you taken a colleague to lunch lately? Why not invite him
or her out today—and include a few other people from different
parts of your company or business network.
Soon, you'll have an ever-expanding web of friends and
contacts.
Learn from Your Setbacks
For all his legendary success and greatness as a president, Abra
ham Lincoln lost all the time. Lincoln experienced numerous busi
ness, political, and personal setbacks over his life. But he never let
any of his failures discourage him from pursuing his goals.
Lincoln failed in business. He failed as a farmer. He lost running
for state legislature. He had a nervous breakdown. He was rejected
for a job as a land officer. When he was finally elected to the
legislature, he lost the vote to be speaker. He ran for Congress
and lost. He ran for and lost a U.S. Senate seat. He ran for vice
president and lost. He ran for the Senate and lost again. And, when
he was finally elected president, the nation he was elected to lead
broke apart. But by this time, all the activities, experiences, and
people he came to know in the process helped him set a direction
for that country that will stand as one of America's great legacies.
My point is, behind any successful person stands a long string of
failures. But toughness and tenacity like Lincoln's can overcome
these setbacks. Lincoln knew the only way to gain ground, to move
forward, to turn his goals into reality, was to learn from his set
backs, to stay engaged, and press on!