# Module 4: Leadership And Influencing Skills
## Introduction: Leadership and influencing skills
# Introduction: Leadership and influencing skills Welcome back in this module, you'll learn the value of a high functioning team and how teamwork can help you reach your project goals. We'll also take you through the different stages of team development, and you'll learn about managing team dynamics. We'll discuss motivating project team members to succeed and providing each person with personalized levels of engagement.
And we'll take you through techniques you can use to influence others. Let's get started.
## The necessity of project teamwork
# The necessity of project teamwork Think of a leader who you admire and respect. What qualities do they have that makes them a good leader? Maybe they're an active listener. Maybe they're great at fostering a sense of community for people around them. As a project manager, leadership is a big part of the job. But being a great project manager is about more than simply leading a team to complete a project.
It's about supporting the people on your team to do their best work, and enabling people to build things they're proud of. In this video, we'll define teamwork and explain why it's important for successful project management. The best leaders are able to get people to work together. That's why a project manager's ability to develop and lead teams that work well together is so important.
But before we go further, let's pause and consider, what exactly is a team? Though there are many different definitions of the word team, here's how we describe it here at Google. A team is a group of people who plan, solve problems, make decisions, and review progress in service of a specific project, or objective. Team members rely on each other to get things done. For example, a software engineering team might be tasked with creating one seamless software experience that meets users needs.
Beyond coordinating with the project manager members of the software engineering team will also coordinate with one another as they work toward their shared goal. Teams differ from workgroups, which we define as being based on organizational or managerial hierarchy. Though people within a workgroup might be working toward a common goal, their work is more likely to be coordinated, controlled or assigned by single person or entity.
For example, a workgroup focused on quality assurance testing might be tasked with running a set of test plans. The group manager might split up that work and assign each quality assurance tester a plan to review. But unlike a team, the testers will work independently of one another to complete their tasks. And will coordinate mainly with the manager and the development team of the feature they're testing.
Teams and work groups each have unique benefits within a larger organization. But for the purpose of this program, we'll focus on teams. More specifically, we'll discuss how project managers develop and lead effective teams by fostering a culture of teamwork. Teamwork is an effective collaborative way of working in which each person is committed to and heading toward a shared goal.
Teamwork maximizes the individual strength of each team member to bring out the best in each person. As you might imagine, teamwork is a crucial part of successful project management. There are a few reasons for this. For one, teamwork fosters creativity. A team might leverage the diverse perspectives, skills and experiences of their members to devise better solutions and build products that address more diverse user needs than they might have if they were working independently of each other.
Teamwork also encourages accountability. The knowledge that the execution of your tasks directly impacts the tasks of the rest of the team can be a powerful motivator. And most importantly, teamwork helps you get stuff done. Big complex projects need smart, capable people to complete tasks and to reach milestones to meet the project goals. As the project manager, it's your job to encourage others to actively engage in working together as a team to foster creativity, encourage accountability and to get stuff done.
Teamwork is an effective collaborative way of working and when done right, it can positively impact both measurable team results and the team culture. Coming up, we'll take you through the elements of effective teams. Meet you there.
## The factors that impact team effectiveness
# The factors that impact team effectiveness Teams are made up of individuals and individuals are driven by different motivators. Whether that's serving their organization, supporting their family or simply working on projects they think are cool. You'll need to learn about the people on your team, in order to best determine how to motivate everyone at the same time. A few years ago, researchers here at Google set out to identify the dynamics of effective teams.
And through this research, they identified five factors that have an impact on team effectiveness. In order of importance, those five factors are: psychological safety, dependability, structure and clarity, meaning and impact. Let's break these down. Let's start with psychological safety, which is the number one factor that impacts team effectiveness. Here's how our researchers define it.
Psychological safety refers to an individual's perception, of the consequences of taking an Interpersonal risks. In other words, they believe it's safe to take risks within their team and they don't risk being labeled as ignorant, incompetent, negative or disruptive. On teams with high psychological safety, teammates feel comfortable taking risks around fellow team members, seeking differing opinions and resolving interpersonal conflict when it comes up.
For example, on my team at Google, we like to say be direct and kind. We've worked really hard to build a team culture, in which we can hold one another accountable while maintaining a shared space that is safe, secure, and peaceful. What I found is that, when opportunities to take risks do arise, like pitching an out-of-the-box idea to my directors, for example, this culture of mutual respect, has already laid the groundwork to get direct feedback without frustration or worrying that I might embarrass myself.
And that's been invaluable in maintaining a high level of psychological safety for the team. Next, we have dependability. Google's researchers explain it this way. On dependable teams, members are reliable and complete their work on time. Creating a dependable team requires the combination of setting, negotiating and meeting expectations. Yes, your team needs to meet the expectations set for them.
At the same time, you as a project manager need to establish a two way relationship with your team. You have to be able to clearly communicate expectations and ensure that the team feels comfortable negotiating with you when needed. For example, it's likely that a person on your team works on two or more projects with competing deadline. If they're afraid to share their own constraints with you, then their work on both projects might suffer.
Alternatively, if they come to you with their concerns and open understanding and negotiation around priorities could help ease their burden. Next, we have a structure and clarity. Here's how our researchers define it. Structure and clarity refers to an individual's understanding of job expectations, knowledge of how to meet those expectations and the consequences of their performance.
Each team member has a clear sense of their individual role, plans and goals. And they have a sense of how their work affects the group. You as the project manager, can help foster a sense of structure and clarity on the team. For example, if a project structure in tracking are sloppy, unorganized and incohesive, then the team's output is likely to be sloppy, unorganized and incohesive.
This can cause tension within the team. Alternatively, if you diligently engage in project tracking, your team will have clarity, feel more united and will be able to effectively collaborate. Meaning, also impacts team effectiveness. Google's researchers defined meaning in this context, as finding a sense of purpose either in the work itself or in the results of that work. For example, your teammates might find meaning in supporting themselves financially, helping the team reach its goals or wanting their products to reach a new community of users.
And finally, we have impact. Our researchers define impact as the belief that the results of one's work matters and creates change. It can be challenging for people to notice how their work can shift an entire ecosystem forward. Part of your role as the project manager, is to help individual teammates identify how they drive impact both within the team and beyond it. Project tracking can be a helpful tool for visualizing progress and impact.
Meeting milestones for example, demonstrates to the team how their individual tasks contribute to the larger project goals. For example, my team focuses on routing within Google Maps. The big idea is to focus on helping people to get to where they're going on time. So, everything we do should make that experience incrementally better. And that's how we add impact. To recap, Google's researchers identified psychological safety, dependability, structure and clarity, meaning and impact as the top five factors that have an impact on Team effectiveness.
Coming up, we'll discuss how project managers lead teams that reach project goals.
## Leading high-functioning teams
# Leading high-functioning teams Hi again, there are a few key ways that project managers help build high- functioning teams who work together to meet project goals. They create systems that turn chaos into order; They communicate and listen; they promote trust and psychological safety; they demonstrate empathy and create motivation; they delegate responsibility and prioritize; and they celebrate team's success. Let's go through each of those points one by one.
Good project managers lead their teams by creating systems that turn chaos into order. You can do this by creating, implementing, and improving: standardize, measurable, repeatable and scalable workflows and processes for your team. For example, if you find that you're usually chasing down teammates for progress on their work, you might set up a process for how and when a teammate should let you know that they've completed a task.
Think of creating systems as a kind of connect the dots puzzle. Being a project manager is sort of like that, but there are no numbers, just dots and a partial image. But we don't need the numbers. We can notice the dots, know their importance and string them together to help everyone visualize the project as a whole. You find the system through the chaos and help other people to find it, too.
Another way that project managers lead is through communicating and listening. As the project manager, it's your job to ensure that everyone on your team is on the same page regarding the status of your project. For example, you might communicate with the team via daily or weekly status update emails and regular team meetings. Team meetings also provide a space for listening, whether you're gathering feedback on a workflow or process, or fielding questions from the group.
You can also solicit feedback or questions via status update emails, since some people might feel more comfortable speaking in private. In addition to communicating and listening to the wider team, it's also your responsibility to regularly connect with individual teammates. You do this by gaining an understanding of communication styles and by asking people on your team how they prefer to communicate.
What's important to know is that everyone communicates differently. For example, I might make small talk with colleagues who I know enjoy it. Or I might get straight to the point with colleagues who prefer not to chat. Project managers also lead by promoting trust and psychological safety within their team. As a reminder, psychological safety refers to an individual's perception of the consequences of taking an interpersonal risk.
Team members need to trust that they're safe and speaking up if they have feedback or concerns about the project as a whole or about their individual tasks. It's your job to create a team atmosphere where different opinions are welcome, and all members remain respectful of one another during challenging conversations. For example, during weekly status meetings, you might schedule time for open, thoughtful and inclusive discussions.
You might model this by asking for help solving a problem that's impacting the team. You should encourage contributions from all team members regardless of role or rank. By doing this, you make clear to your teammates that they should feel comfortable challenging processes and workflows. And you make clear that critiques of the project and plans are welcomed and valued no matter who they come from.
While it can feel challenging to provide and accept feedback, it's a healthy part of project management and usually makes for a better project outcome. On an individual level, project managers lead by practicing empathy and creating motivation for their team members. It's possible you've heard the phrase, "there's no I in team," and while that's true that teams need to work together to be effective, it's also important to remember that teams are made up of individuals with differing motivations and lives outside of work.
You can demonstrate empathy for your teammates by being present, listening, and asking questions. During one on one conversations, avoid making assumptions about what the other person is thinking and feeling. If you're quiet and curious, there's always more to learn. In addition to showing empathy for my team, I also like to create motivation by recognizing a job well done through public forums.
Like in a meeting or a group email. Recognition tells people that they're doing the right things, and motivates them to keep up the good work. Be sure to recognize good work, and not just heroic efforts. Project managers also lead by delegating responsibility and prioritizing. Most projects will likely have multiple tasks taking place simultaneously. And it's your job to keep the team focused and heading toward the project goals and deliverables.
By delegating responsibility for specific tasks to individuals on your team, you provide your teammates with the opportunity to add value using their particular set of skills. You also give yourself space to focus on the project as a whole. By prioritizing tasks, you reduce ambiguity and provide clarity for your team. If you think that a task is important, but your team doesn't, they might work on whatever tasks they like.
By prioritizing and making that prioritization known, you keep the team focused. Work with your team to build consensus around priorities, explaining your rationale can help you get their buy-in and increase their commitment to the work. Lastly, project managers lead by celebrating team success, both at the end of the project and throughout it. This includes celebrating big and small wins like reaching a milestone or receiving positive feedback from stakeholders.
Celebrating success is an important tool for motivating the team because it increases morale and boosts the team's engagement. You might celebrate the team with a group lunch, a small gift or even just a congratulatory email. Simple gestures like these demonstrate appreciation for the team's hard work. And when people feel appreciated, they tend to work harder and their teams perform better.
To recap, project managers build high functioning teams in a few key ways: creating systems that turn chaos into order; communicating and listening; promoting trust and psychological safety; demonstrating empathy and creating motivation; delegating responsibility and prioritizing; and celebrating team success. As you grow in your career, you'll strengthen your ability to lead bigger and more complex teams, but the principles of teamwork will remain the same. Coming up, you'll learn about the stages of team development and how to manage team dynamics.
I'll see you soon.
## Providing “air cover” to your team
Providing “air cover” to your team As you have learned so far, project managers build teams that meet project goals in many different ways, from delegating responsibility and prioritizing tasks to promoting trust and psychological safety. But there is another skill great project managers have that we will cover in this reading: the ability to provide air cover to protect their team. Air cover refers to support for and protection of a team in the face of out-of-scope requests or criticism from leadership.
What is air cover? A lot of what we have covered throughout this program has focused on leading and managing a project team. Much of project management involves overseeing the work of others, but it also involves managing the needs and expectations of those above you. Those people are your stakeholders, project sponsors, and other leaders within your organization. Though the needs and requests of your stakeholders are crucial to the project’s success, there may come a time when you will need to prioritize the needs of your team over the wants of your stakeholders.
This is called providing “air cover” for your team, and it is an important part of managing a project. The ability to effectively provide air cover requires a trusting relationship between a project manager and their stakeholders. In this relationship, the project manager aims to demonstrate their abilities to lead a team and communicate effectively. There is some risk involved in providing air cover.
Sometimes a project manager provides air cover and the project team is still unable to deliver on the goals of the project. In this case, stakeholders may question the project manager’s ability to complete projects successfully. So, when preparing to defend your team against out-of-scope requests, be sure that you are confident in your team’s progress toward the project goal. Providing air cover: A case study Imagine, for example, that you are a project manager for a brand of coffee sold in supermarkets throughout your region.
You and your team have been tasked with launching three new flavors of ground coffee: vanilla, hazelnut, and mocha. However, well into the execution phase, your project sponsor sets a meeting with you to make an out-of-scope request: They would like to add a caramel-flavored coffee to the product lineup. Your team is already at maximum capacity preparing to launch the agreed-upon flavors, and a fourth flavor would add an unreasonable amount of work and stress to your very busy team.
Let’s discuss how you might provide air cover for your team in a situation like this one. Saying “No” without explicitly saying “No” One way to provide air cover to your team is to say “no” to your sponsor’s request without explicitly saying “no.” There are a few ways to do this: - You can gently push back with a polite explanation that their request won’t be possible to complete under the current constraints—the scope, time, and/or cost—of the project. - You can politely offer to get back to the stakeholder with your response.
This gives you time to better understand the request and to consult with trusted team members to lay out the benefits and costs of this request. And, if you are lucky, this might even give the stakeholder the opportunity to reconsider their request or forget about it entirely. Whether you choose to push back immediately or get back to your stakeholder with your response, it is crucial to offer alternative solutions.
Maybe the project timeline can expand to accommodate the request. Or maybe you and your team have a strong relationship with another team at the organization that can help fulfill the request. Whatever the alternative, brainstorming other options can help soften the blow and provide stakeholders with new ideas. For example, you consider telling your sponsor that the current project timeline will only allow for the launch of three new coffee flavors, and that the launch of a fourth flavor would only be possible by pushing the launch date back by two months.
If you were to respond to your sponsor in this way, you would be both gently refusing their request and offering them an alternative that could work for your team. While a simple “no” response might frustrate the person making the request, gentle pushback paired with alternative options can protect your team from new work while preserving your professional relationship with stakeholders. If your stakeholders trust your leadership abilities and perspective, then they will be more likely to accept your pushback and alternative solutions.
Intervening from behind the scenes Another way project managers provide air cover for their teams is to master the challenge of delicately intervening from behind the scenes when a stakeholder is making unrealistic requests or offering unreasonable critiques. Continuing with our coffee company example, you know how hard your team has been working to launch the new products. To avoid causing the extra stress that might come with the knowledge that the stakeholder wants to increase their workload, you avoid sharing this request with your entire project team.
This doesn’t mean you need to come up with a solution all by yourself, however. Instead of calling a team meeting to discuss the stakeholder’s request for a new flavor, you consult with only two trusted members of your team to help brainstorm solutions. One of these team members mentions that they know two new flavors are slated to be added to the fall product lineup in six months, and that perhaps the caramel flavor could be launched then instead of with the current group.
This would give your team more time to work on developing the product while still fulfilling the stakeholder’s request. Ultimately, you bring the suggestions of adding the flavor to the fall product lineup or pushing back the launch date of the current lineup to the project sponsor, and they accept your solution to launch the new flavor in the fall. Managing the expectations of your stakeholder while looping in relevant teammates on a need-to-know basis was essential here.
This allowed your team to focus on their work without the possibility of an increased workload or an unnecessary distraction. Key takeaway Providing air cover for your team takes practice. It requires a careful balance of the needs of your stakeholders and the needs of your project team. As you become more experienced in leading projects, you will develop a stronger sense of how to manage nuanced situations like these and provide the air cover your team needs to do their best work.
## Emilio: Learning to lead
# Emilio: Learning to lead I am from Orange County, California. My mom was a school teacher for the majority of my life. She also went on to be assistant principal and then became a principal herself. During that entire time as a kid growing up, I never had my summers. I actually ended up spending all of my time with my mom at her school. Helping her with teachers who wanted to restock their shelves, or file away papers, or shred papers.
Some important advice that my mother told me when I was growing up, especially when I would go spend time with her in her schools and saw what her leadership style looked like. She had, and still has this uncanny ability to connect with people in ways that not only make them feel seen, but feel empowered. And I think that is a very powerful leadership style. And it is something that I like to bring to my project management role as well.
Because it allows me to make sure that people feel like they can get things done, but it's not just for me, it's for a collective vision. And the advice was deference gives you the experience to be able to lead. And it's important because as a project manager, as we've said in these courses, you're not going to know or you're not going to have a lot of the technical or specific domain expertise that you need in order to create the big meaty things that you're trying to drive.
But as a program or a project manager, you're kind of the leader who's supposed to be making sure things get done, and you work with every little piece of the pie. So like my mom, who was a principal worked with the custodial staff. She worked with the PTA, she worked with the teachers, and the teachers union, she worked with the parents. And she developed this great network of people that helped her get things done.
So, I would say that was the best advice that I've received. My name is Emilio Garcia and I am a responsible innovation program manager at Google.
## Team development and managing team dynamics
# Team development and managing team dynamics Imagine that you're starting a new project with a brand new team of people. No one on the team has worked together before, so this will be a new experience for everyone. To better understand how your team might develop over time, let's discuss the psychologist Bruce Tuckman's five stages of team development. Forming, storming, norming, performing and adjourning.
These stages of development illustrate how teams grow from a disparate group of people into a high functioning unit. You might even recognize the characteristics of each stage from previous experiences working on a team. Tuchman's first stage of team development is the forming stage. At this point everything feels shiny and new. Individuals on the team are just getting to know on another, and they're eager to make a good impression.
And typically they're excited for the work to begin. During this stage, you as a project manager should clarify project goals, roles, and context about the project. People are seeking guidance and it's your job to provide that guidance. The second stage of team development is the storming stage, this is where things get a bit trickier. As people settle into their roles and the work on their project begins, the people on your team are interacting more and maybe disagreeing a bit.
This is where feelings of frustration might emerge. Individuals might take issues with certain processes they feel are inefficient, or other teammates they disagree with, especially when the team is navigating tasks that are much more complex than they first appeared. It makes sense, right? If you're working closely with a new group of people for the first time, there's bound to be some interpersonal conflict.
Teammates might disagree on time, and effort estimations, vary in their levels of independence, or prefer to prioritize certain tasks over other equally important tasks. As the project manager, it's your job to focus on conflict resolution. Listen as the team addresses problems to solve and share insights on how the team might better function as a unit. After storming comes Tuchman's third stage, the norming stage.
At this point, the team has resolved some of its internal conflict by establishing new norms. Like processes and workflows that make it easier for everyone to get things done. The team feels better equipped to work together efficiently and effectively. You, as the project manager should codify the team norms, ensuring that the team is aware of those norms and reinforce them when needed.
For example, if you've agreed to discuss solutions to issues during weekly team meetings, ensure that your weekly agenda budgets time for this topic each week. Tuchman's fourth stage is the performing stage. During this time, the team works together relatively seamlessly to complete tasks, reach milestones and make progress toward the project goal. In the performing stage, you as the project manager should focus on delegating, motivating and providing feedback to keep up the team's momentum.
The fifth and final stage of team development is the adjourning stage. In this stage the project is wrapping up and it's time for the team to disband. It can be a bittersweet time for the team and you might want to mark the end of the project with a celebration. You as the project manager should set up time to celebrate the final milestones and success of the project as a group. And be sure each member of your team knows what's next for them.
Okay, to recap, Tuckman's five stages of team development are forming, storming, norming, performing and adjourning. These stages of team development come together to form a helpful framework you can use to assess and recognize team dynamics, and then adjust your management style accordingly. Team dynamics refer to the forces both conscious and unconscious, that impact team behavior and performance.
Managing team dynamics is a big part of determining how to motivate your team. It might be tempting to assume that people can go full-speed ahead into a project. But in reality, it's important to take time to understand the dynamics of your team overall and how individual team members are fitting in. This is especially important during the more precarious forming and storming stages.
Let's break down why managing team dynamics is so important. First, teams have individuals with different skill sets, varying degrees of autonomy, and competing priorities. It's your job to forge consensus and set clear purposes, goals, dependencies and accountability. When teams function cohesively, they can focus on the tasks and objectives at hand. Another reason why it's important to manage team dynamics is that it helps you to create a collaborative and psychologically safe environment.
When team members feel safe, they're willing to help one another, and accept help when they need it. This benefits the entire project by keeping schedules on track. Though it can take time to get to the performing stage, using the norming stage as a time to foster a collaborative environment can help you get there quicker. Understanding and managing team dynamics can also help you understand how to motivate your team.
Motivated team members are likely to contribute more to discussions, complete their tasks and actively participate in other project activities. A positive team atmosphere can help employees feel empowered. More comfortable taking calculated risks, and more likely to seek out innovative solutions to complex problems. Remember, so much of team dynamics happens under the surface. Identifying and understanding the stages of team development can help you make sense of how dynamics are playing out on your team.
This can help you to be a better leader. Coming up, we'll discuss what it means to promote ethical and inclusive leadership in the workplace. Meet you there.
## Rowena: Delegating the details
# Rowena: Delegating the details Hi. I'm Rowena, a Senior Program Manager in the Systems Productivity and Reporting Team in Google Cloud. As a project manager, you'll find that you're not actually the direct manager of people in their roles. The key soft skill to have here is around influence; influencing without authority. It's the ability to be able to communicate with people and make sure that they understand your goals and objectives and take them along on a shared vision and shared journey.
When I first became a project manager, one of the mistakes that I often made was trying to do everything for myself and not asking for help. Over the course of the last couple of years, I've really learned how to delegate and work with others as part of a team to make sure that I'm effectively managing a project as a project manager regardless of whether I have management or authority over the project team, and allowing those SMEs to really do what they're really good at. Delegating for me in my day-to-day role looks like this: I try to find subject matter experts or people that really enjoy doing a specific something that may not actually be their role.
One of the best pieces of advice I ever got from a mentor was around finding people in the organization that enjoy doing something and delegating your work to them. That way you can focus on overall project or program management without having to get bogged down in the weeds by certain details that actually you might not enjoy doing or someone else really enjoys doing. Psychological safety is really important in teams because it brings diversity of thought to the table.
One thing that I'm really working on is making sure that we practice inclusive meetings. An example of that could be in a meeting if you notice that one or two participants are usually quiet or don't speak up, try to encourage them to be a part of the conversation. Even better, have a coffee with them before and ask them what they think of the upcoming topic. Encourage them to bring those ideas to the table.
Having diversity of thought in the room is so important. Otherwise, you're going to end up with one person in the room constantly just bringing their thoughts and ideas to the table. That's not very diverse. One thing with psychological safety is this partnership with mentorship and sponsorship. To delegate, I make sure that I sponsor people. I make sure that I showcase their best quality work across the whole project team.
It's really important for morale. On the other side with mentorship, if there's a junior team member on a team that maybe doesn't have the experience or isn't as confident speaking up, I usually delegate smaller tasks to them to build up their confidence or delegate something that they might actually consider to be fun that's not in their normal day-to-day work. Finding those unique balances is the best way to delegate and prioritize.
## Ethical and inclusive leadership
# Ethical and inclusive leadership Welcome back. Leading a project team comes with the responsibility to create a psychologically safe environment for the people around you. Through ethical and inclusive leadership, you can create a team culture that works for everyone and motivates the people around you to do their best work. In this video, you'll learn the definitions of ethical and inclusive leadership.
You'll also learn about the importance of fostering a culture of respect, creating equal opportunity to succeed, and ways to invite and integrate diverse perspectives. So what do ethical and inclusive leadership entail in a team and organization? Let's start with ethical leadership. Ethical leadership is a form of leadership that promotes and values honesty, justice, respect, community and integrity.
You promote ethical leadership by defining and aligning values within your team and demonstrating how adhering to those values benefits the mission of the organization. For an example of this, consider how work culture has evolved in recent years. Around the world, employees working for organizations of all kinds have been calling on their employers to adopt ethical policy changes and to state their positions on current events.
Companies can demonstrate ethical leadership by creating forums where employees can raise their viewpoints, be heard and receive follow-ups from company leaders on employee concerns. Ethical leadership is closely tied to inclusive leadership. If ethical leadership's aim is to create forums where employees' concerns can be heard, inclusive leadership aims to put what we've heard into action to create an environment that encourages.
And empowers each and every member of our community. That in turn leads to more innovation and better solutions. Here's how we think about inclusion here at Google. Inclusive leadership is when everyone's unique identity, background and experiences are respected, valued and integrated into how the team operates. These differences improve the team culture, collaboration, innovation and output.
Inclusive leadership is related to diversity in that diversity is the set of differences each of us possesses, whether visible or invisible that gives us each a unique perspective on the world and our work. Inclusion is what the team does with that diversity of thought and perspective. At Google, we've identified three ways that managers can lead inclusively. These include fostering a culture of respect, creating equal opportunity to succeed and inviting and integrating diverse perspectives.
To foster a culture of respect, it's your job as a project manager to serve as a role model, set the tone for the team and take action when needed. That means modeling the values of your organization, taking appropriate action if misconduct occurs. Creating an environment in which team members feel comfortable speaking up with concerns, and recognizing team contributions regularly.
To create equal opportunity to succeed, you should ensure that each person on the team has access to the information and resources they need to do their best work. You do this through regular communication, accessible documentation, and regular check-ins with the team to listen, share information, ask and answer questions and provide support. As a project manager, you're in the perfect spot to identify work that might be a good fit for a person who really wants it, but who shies away from asking for it.
Knowing an individual's aspirations will help you highlight these opportunities. Finally, to invite and integrate diverse perspectives, it's your role to cultivate a culture in which each team member's perspective can be openly shared, heard and integrated into work related decisions. You do this by creating a sense of psychological safety on the team and by inviting teammates to share their thoughts, ideas and concerns, regardless of their role or rank on the team.
Developing ethical and inclusive leadership skills requires regular practice. So whether you're leading a project team of two, or 20, or 200, you should be diligent in building up your inclusive leadership skill set by creating an environment in which your team feels safe, heard and valued. You can do this by fostering a culture of respect, creating equal opportunity to succeed and inviting and integrating diverse perspectives.
In the next lesson, we'll discuss the fundamentals of influencing, as well as some common mistakes that people make when attempting to influence others. Meet you in the next video.
## A framework for ethical decision-making
A framework for ethical decision-making Ethical leadership is a form of leadership that promotes and values honesty, justice, respect, community, and integrity. As the leader of a project team, you will be expected to help your team succeed by leading with ethics. Building respect and trust with the teams you work with—from individuals to external partners to project stakeholders—begins with practicing ethical conduct.
In this reading, you’ll gain an understanding of a common framework for ethical decision-making that can help you ensure your actions align with the ethical standards of your organization. Ethics within your organization Ethics can be defined as the principles of conduct governing an individual or a group. However, there is no single, universally-accepted grouping of ethical standards—these definitions differ based on the culture and community at your company.
In the working world, ethical standards may differ based on profession, industry, and organization. Usually, an organization will have its own code of conduct which specifies the standards to which it holds its employees accountable. Here at Google, our code of conduct makes clear the expectations that we have for our employees and board members. It is possible that the organizations you will join throughout your career will have codes of conduct, too.
Part of the challenge of leading with ethics is ensuring that your actions align with the ethical standards of your community, both within your organization and beyond it. In your role as a project manager, a clear framework for ethical decision-making can help guide you to make positive decisions throughout your project. A common framework for ethical decision-making The Markkula Center for Applied Ethics at Santa Clara University developed the following framework as a helpful guide for ethical decision-making.
Recognize an ethical issue According to this framework, you can begin to question the ethics of an issue by asking yourself questions about the nature of the issue. Could your decision negatively impact another person or group of people? Does the issue go beyond what is legal or efficient? From there, you can proceed onto fact gathering. - Example: A vendor you have worked with in the past sends you a generous holiday gift shortly before you are about to select a vendor for a particular task in your project.
If you accept the gift, would others be negatively impacted? To determine the answer to this question, get more facts. Get the facts Decide what you should do about the issue, and seek answers as needed. Consult with the right people to consider all of the options available to you. - Example: Continuing with the example above, you should check to see if your company has ethics guidelines regarding accepting gifts from external parties.
If not, consult with your HR representative about the matter. Evaluate alternative actions You can evaluate alternative actions by asking yourself the following questions: - “Which option will produce the most good and do the least harm?” - “Which option best respects the rights of all who have a stake?” - “Which option treats people equally or proportionally?” - “Which option best serves the community as a whole, not just some members?” - “Which option leads me to act as the sort of person I want to be?” Note that your answers to these questions are subjective, and you may want to elicit the opinion of others before deciding on an alternative action. - Example: In the case of the vendor gift example, the answer to the question “Which option treats people equally or proportionally?” might be “decline the gift,” given that accepting it might influence your decision about who to award the contract to.
Make a decision and test it Once you have chosen an option, test it by imagining the reaction to your choice from a person whose opinion you value. - Example: Once you have decided to decline the gift, discuss your decision with your manager, HR representative, or a trusted colleague. Act and reflect on the outcome Consider how to carry out your decision with thoughtfulness and care, and after you act, consider the results of your decision.
- Example: Respectfully decline the vendor’s gift, noting your reason (for example, your company’s ethical guidelines state that employees are not permitted to accept gifts valued at more than $20 from vendors or contractors). Key takeaway A framework like this one can help you feel better-equipped to make ethical decisions regarding your project and team, which is a central component of ethical leadership. Like so much of project management, ethical leadership takes diligence and practice, and it is crucial to build this skill.
As you become more comfortable leading project teams, you will strengthen your ability to make decisions that you can feel good about. Gaining trust and respect from the people you work with can make it easier to influence without authority. If those around you trust your decision-making, they may be more likely to try to help you achieve project goals, even if you aren’t their direct manager.
## Steps to effective influencing
# Steps to effective influencing Hi again. In this video, we're going to discuss influencing the people around you. I'll describe the four steps of influencing and some common influencing mistakes. There are a few techniques that project managers can use to influence the people they work with, both within a team and beyond it. But first, what do we mean by influencing? Influencing is the ability to alter another person's thinking or behaviors.
We'll discuss the concept of influencing in the context of our Plant Pals project at Office Green. Let's say that your team would like to partner with a well-known chocolate manufacturer to create a bundle deal. With this deal, the client could choose to add on a high-quality chocolate bar with each plant they purchase. You decide to send an initial email to a partnership Manager at the chocolate manufacturer to gauge their interest in the idea, and ultimately influence them to work with you.
So, how do you go about writing that email that effectively influences your audience to consider your idea? Well, it turns out there are four tried and true steps of effective influencing. Leadership expert, Dr. Jay A Conger identifies the steps to effective influencing as: establish credibility, frame for common ground, provide evidence and connect emotionally. Let's discuss each step.
The first step to effective influencing is to establish credibility. During this step, you make the case for why your audience should listen to you. According to Dr. Conger, credibility comes from two sources, expertise, and relationships. You need to demonstrate to your audience that you're an expert on a given topic, whether that's through professional experience, extensive research, or something else, and you need to demonstrate relationship credibility by establishing that you're honest, trustworthy, and someone who they want to work with.
To establish credibility, you might kick off your Office Green email by greeting the recipient by name, then writing something like, "I'm Elita, a lead project manager at Office Green. Your colleague, Alex, passed on your contact information. Alex and I worked together to launch new services at Office Green before she joined your organization." In these opening lines, you've established expertise, credibility by introducing your role at office green and by suddenly highlighting that you've launched new services in the past.
To demonstrate relationship credibility, you've established that you and the recipient have a shared contact who has worked closely with you in the past and can vouch for your trustworthiness and emotional intelligence. The second step is to frame for common ground. In this step, you'll make the case for how your idea can benefit your audience. To determine this, you'll need a strong understanding of your audience and their values.
In essence, what about your idea will appeal to them, and how will they stand to benefit from agreeing to your idea? In our Office Green email, you might establish that you've researched their organization extensively and believe that this new service might align with their current offerings. For example, you might write something like this, "We're launching a service to provide top clients with desk plants and we'd like to explore a bundle offering to pair high-quality chocolate with each plant order.
I've admired your organizations push in recent years to work with other lifestyle and wellness brands and I think there may be a great opportunity for us to collaborate." In this portion of the email, you've established that you've done your research on the organization and that their previous partnerships indicate that working together might be a great fit. The next step is to provide evidence. In this step, you'll make your case through hard data and persuasive storytelling.
Numbers aren't strong enough on their own. They need stories to liven them up. In our Office Green email, you might appeal to your recipient with a line like, "We recently surveyed clients to gauge interest in this kind of offering, and your brand came up again and again." In this example, you provided evidence through the results of client surveys which showed overwhelmingly positive brand recognition for our shared audience.
The last step is to connect emotionally. In this step, you'll demonstrate to your audience that you're emotionally committed to your idea and you'll do your best to match their emotional state. In our Office Green email, you might demonstrate an emotional connection by tapping into their brand ethos. For example, you might write something like, "We've been following your profile on Instagram and love your posts on chocolate's connection to living a well and balanced lifestyle.
Perhaps we can discuss combining forces to bring this message to an even wider audience," and then you end your note with a friendly closer, something like, "If you're interested, I'd love to connect and share what our partner program is all about." To recap, establishing credibility, framing for common ground, providing evidence and connecting emotionally, are four proven, effective steps you can apply when attempting to influence others. Dr. Conger also identified four common mistakes that people make when attempting to influence others.
They'll often approach their audience too aggressively, and that tends to put people off ideas entirely. They might also resist compromise, which is crucial for any kind of mutual agreement. They'll focus too much on developing their argument for the idea and not enough time establishing credibility, framing for common ground, providing evidence and connecting emotionally, and they'll assume that they can work out an agreement through just one conversation.
These mistakes can jeopardize your attempts to influence others and limit your ability to build relationships, so be mindful of these common mistakes when preparing to pitch another person on your big idea. Great job. Now you know the four steps of influencing, as well as some common mistakes that people make when attempting to influence others. Coming up, you'll learn more about personal and organizational sources of influencing power.
Meet you in the next video.
## Using sources of power to influence
# Using sources of power to influence Welcome back. Earlier, you learned how your approach can impact your ability to influence others. But influencing is about more than just your approach. In fact, so much of your ability to influence others comes from your own sources of power. Throughout your career, you'll rely on your sources of power to influence others to do great work in service of the project goals.
In his book, The Elements of Power: Lessons On Leadership and Influence, the researcher Terry Bacon determined that most power sources fall into two buckets: organizational and personal. From these power sources, we picked out the ones we feel are most important to cover here. Let's start with organizational sources of power, which include your role, information, network, and reputation.
First we have your role, which refers to your position within an organization or team. In a project management role, you have a certain level of power over the project, and therefore more influence. Information is another source of organizational power, which refers to your level of access and control over information. As a project manager, you possess a huge amount of information about your work and your stakeholders, which can work to your benefit.
Now it may be tempting to assume that as a leader you have all of the answers, but to be a good influencer you should ask questions and consider all ideas. You may even hear new insights and notice issues in a different way. Share information with your team regularly so that they can provide input on the full picture. You can also derive power from your network. This refers to people you're connected with professionally and personally.
Strong connections within your organization and beyond it can boost your ability to influence others and help your project continue on. If you demonstrate that you're well-connected and have a good chance of getting stakeholders support or budget approval for your plans, then you're more likely to get your audience on your side. You should use your network to help colleagues make new connections.
Your team's effectiveness will increase as you take on the responsibility of helping each person develop their skills and expand their network, which in turn increases their own influencing power. Lastly, we have reputation, which refers to how others perceive you overall. As you might expect, people with positive reputations tend to be more influential than those with negative reputations.
One way I've noticed this play out is through collaboration. If you're a good collaborator, you can boost your reputation by becoming known for being easy to work with, keeping your commitments, and helping others achieve their own goals. Your role, access to and control of information, network, and reputation are important organizational sources of power to be aware of. It's also important to identify power sources that come from you.
These are referred to as personal sources of power, which include knowledge, expressiveness, history, and character. I like to think of these as your own personal superpowers. Knowledge refers to the power that you draw from your expertise in certain subjects, your unique abilities and skill sets, and even your ability to learn new things. What comes to mind when you think about an influential leader?
Typically, they have a lot of knowledge in their field and you're more likely to trust their opinion. When you're considering how to use your own knowledge as a source of power, reflect on the expertise you already have, and consider areas where you still want to grow and learn more. Expressiveness refers to your ability to communicate with others. This is a big one. As you learned earlier, so much of influencing comes down to how you approach your audience.
Maybe you're a great storyteller, or maybe you're really good at connecting emotionally with people. Strong communication skills like these can significantly increase your ability to influence others. The next personal source of power is history. History refers to the level of personal history there is between yourself and another person. Makes sense, right? A strong relationship with the person you hope to influence can go a long way.
As a project manager, you'll be managing team dynamics and building team relationships, which can help you build up personal history with the people around you. And finally, character. Character refers to other people's view of the qualities that make you, you. Like, honesty, integrity, kindness, and so much more. Character is a huge one. You'll derive an enormous amount of power from high estimates of your character.
What personal characteristics do you value within yourself? These are the qualities that have the power to make you a strong, supportive leader for the people around you. Knowledge, expressiveness, history, and character are just four personal sources of power, but it's important to remember that there's so much wrapped in each one of these. There's trustworthiness, authenticity, wisdom, and on and on.
There's so many attributes to draw power from. I like to think of these elements as personal superpowers. I learned early on in my career that my personal superpower is knowledge, specifically my innate curiosity. When I started at Google, I didn't have a background in software engineering, but I'm a naturally curious person and I'm not afraid to ask questions. When I join a new team, I find the engineer who seems to have the most knowledge or experience, and I ask them to teach me how everything works.
Most people are genuinely interested in sharing what they know. That initial chat usually leads to conversations over lunch, which helps me to build my own knowledge and personal history with my colleague. And through these conversations, I learn about other teammates to connect with, which increases my network. As you build your career, try to identify your own superpowers. Find the combination of influencing techniques that best suits your particular circumstances.
It takes practice to polish your skills and lean into various superpowers when working with others. But if you invest time in thinking and troubleshooting your influencing strategy, it will pay off. In the next video, we'll review and wrap up. Meet you there.
## Chris: Influencing others by demonstrating project impact
# Chris: Influencing others by demonstrating project impact Hi, I'm Chris. I'm a Diversity Program Manager here at Google. Influencing is a huge component when it comes to program management. You might have an incredible idea about where you want a program or a project to go, and so once you have come up with all these creative ideas, and you want to convince someone to sign off on it, you have to think about what's in it for them.
What's the impact that this project or program is going to have on the business, on the consumer, what have you, and so once you are able to distill what that impact is going to be, you can really think about how you're going to frame the ask to that executive stakeholder. Influencing, everyone has the ability to do it. You've done it since you were a kid, whether it be trying to go out and play with your friends or get your favorite meal from the favorite restaurant that you have.
You've always tried to influence someone to give you what you want, but you have to think about what the value is for them. So different, when you're a kid, the value is only really for you. When I first came into my role as a diversity program manager, there were a set of programs that had been around for a number of years, and I came in, I had a fresh set of eyes, and I recognized that there's a lot of redundancy with the programs that we had.
What I did is came in and I had to influence people that had been running those programs, that their programs were all very similar in that if we all work together, we'd be able to build just one program that solves all these needs. Now that took some time, right? I had to show examples of why I think this singular program could impact the target population in the same way I had to show how each person would have a role in this new found program, right?
I couldn't just say like all of your programs need to stop. It was more so all your programs need to mature into this new identity, so it took some time. It really also took a lot of relationship massaging and maturing because I was a new guy, so I had to come in and prove myself. The impact was shown pretty soon after because it was thought through well in advance. My advice is: keep it simple.
So, you have all of the background information about why this is important, all the steps it will take you to get there, but the person who you're trying to influence just needs to know when you're going to get there and basic information on how you're going to get there. And so, don't try to bring them into the weeds with you. Keep them at a point that makes sense for the audience that you're in.
So if you're talking to a researcher, they might want to know the data points. So, talking to the marketing team, they want to probably know the more splashy high-level elements and the target demographics. So keep in mind your audience, but keep it simple. Influencing doesn't need to be a chore. Once you've done the work, you should be excited to talk to someone about it, and so, if you don't feel excited about the work that you're doing, I would take a step back and think about what it is that you are building, what it is that you're putting together, and if it doesn't excite you, it's not going to excite somebody else.
## Creating an effective influencing statement
Creating an effective influencing statement Introductions in literature are important. Think of the opening lines of a good book—they help set the tone for what the reader can expect going forward. Introductions are important in project management too, especially when you are hoping to influence a stakeholder to consider and approve a new plan or idea. In this reading, we will help you apply techniques you can use to influence others.
We will take you through the steps of creating a strong influencing statement that opens the conversation and sets you up for success with your audience. What is influencing? First, let’s review what it means to influence another person. Influencing is the ability to alter another person’s thinking or behaviors. If you have ever tried to persuade another person to understand your point of view, then you know that influencing is easier said than done.
Conger’s four steps In his article, The Necessary Art of Persuasion, Jay A. Conger identified four steps to effectively influence another person to consider new ideas. As you learned earlier, those steps are: - Establish credibility - Frame for common ground - Provide evidence - Connect emotionally Throughout your career in project management, there will be times when you will need to influence someone to consider an idea, approve a plan, or complete a project task.
Conger’s four steps provide a useful framework for thoughtfully approaching conversations that are important to project success and influencing stakeholders. Let’s explore each step further before applying them to an influencing statement: 1. Establish credibility When trying to persuade another person to listen to you, it helps to establish credibility. Ask yourself, why should this person listen to you?
According to Conger, it is best to draw credibility from both expertise and relationships. You can build credibility by showing a level of expertise on the topic at hand. It also helps to have “a history of sound judgement.” If you find that you lack expertise on a subject, don’t worry! You can work to increase your knowledge through education or research, or you can even ask an expert for help.
You can also build credibility through strong relationships with your audience and others around you. Conger found that influential leaders tend to show their trustworthiness and willingness to do right by their colleagues over time, and in turn, people are more likely to listen to them. 2. Frame for common ground The next step in effectively persuading people is to frame for common ground.
You can do this by making a case for how your idea would benefit your audience, and you can determine how your ideas will benefit your audience by gaining a strong understanding of them and what they value. Pay close attention to what matters to your audience by listening carefully and gathering information during meetings and conversations. Then frame your ideas based on your audience’s needs and interests.
3. Provide evidence The third step is to provide evidence that supports your ideas. As Conger notes, though numbers are important, the best persuaders pair numbers with vivid language. They share stories, examples, and metaphors to help influence their audiences. Using vivid language can help bring your figures to life and draw stakeholders’ interest to your proposal. 4. Connect emotionally The fourth step is to connect emotionally with your audience.
In this step, you illustrate that you are emotionally invested in the idea that you are presenting. But crucially, Conger notes, you must also do your best to determine and match the emotional state of your audience. Applying Conger’s steps to an influencing statement Conger’s four steps—establish credibility, frame for common ground, provide evidence, and connect emotionally—are meant to be applied throughout important conversations with those whom you aim to influence.
But to set yourself up for success during these conversations, you can apply the four steps to the influencing statement that sets the stage for your idea. Let’s discuss how Conger’s four steps come together in the following example: Carmen is a project manager at a small marketing agency. She would like to convince a human resources director at her organization to approve a new process for onboarding new graphic design employees.
Though the company has an existing onboarding process, this process is the same for all new hires, regardless of role. As a project manager working in the human resources department, she learns that it is hard for newly-hired graphic designers to onboard since there are only a few people who hold graphic design roles at the company. Carmen identifies that there is a lack of information available for new graphic design hires to turn to for learning about procedures and software specific to their role.
Carmen would like to propose that all new graphic design hires receive a digital welcome packet containing guidelines for installing software, processes to be aware of, and other design-specific onboarding documents. Carmen developed a similar process in her role at a previous company, and it received a positive response from employees. She thinks a similar process will work for her new organization too, so she sets up time with her director to present her idea.
To influence her director to approve the new process, Carmen opens her presentation with a strong influencing statement: I’d like to propose a new onboarding process for graphic design hires. (Provide evidence) In reviewing our new hire surveys, 80% of recent graphic design hires have assigned a negative rating to our onboarding process. When I followed up with respondents, I learned that our graphic designers lack access to relevant information that could help them acclimate to our organization faster.
To address this issue, I would like to create a digital welcome packet containing design-specific onboarding documentation. (Frame for common ground) I have met with leaders on the graphic design team to discuss this idea, and they agreed that a design-specific onboarding process might help increase the productivity of new hires, since a better onboarding process would enable them to be better prepared to take on projects in their first few weeks on the job. (Establish credibility) In my previous role, I designed a similar, role-specific onboarding process, which increased our new hire satisfaction rates by 60%.
I think a new process could benefit employees here, as well. (Connect emotionally) It can be overwhelming to join a new company. A smoother, more personalized onboarding experience might help set the tone for the kind of support new graphic design hires can expect from our team. Key takeaway In this influencing statement, the project manager: - Provided evidence from company surveys to set the stage for her proposal.
- Framed for common ground by noting how a new onboarding process might increase employee productivity. - Established credibility by outlining her previous experience with launching similar processes. - Connected emotionally by encouraging her audience to reflect on past experiences they may have endured as a new hire. By opening with a strong influencing statement, you can set yourself up for a successful conversation that is more likely to persuade your audience and achieve your goals.
## Wrap-up
# Wrap-up Nice work. You made it to the end of this module. How are you feeling? Over the past few videos, I've taken you through the many facets of team management and influencing. You learned to explain the importance of teamwork in creating a high-functioning team that can complete the work of a project on time. And you learned how to lead in ways that motivate others to succeed, both at the team level and on an individual level too.
You learned about the 5 stages of team development, which is a helpful framework for understanding and managing sometimes challenging team dynamics. I explained how to apply techniques for effectively influencing the people around you, and you learned what not to do when trying to influence others. And finally, you learned about the sources of power, both organizational and personal that contribute to your overall ability to influence your team.
Coming up, I'll take you through effective project communication. See you soon